Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Exploration of trance states: phenomenology, brain
correlates, and clinical applications☆

Olivia Gosseries 1,2,3, Nolwenn Marie 1, Yannick Lafon 1,
Aminata Bicego 1, Charlotte Grégoire 1, Victor Oswald 1,4 and
Audrey Vanhaudenhuyse 1,5

This review provides an exploration of trance states, covering
their phenomenology, neural mechanisms, and clinical uses.
Trance states, present in diverse cultural contexts from
shamanic practices to modern adaptations, have recently
captured the interest of researchers and clinicians. Here, we
delve into the phenomenological aspects of trance experiences,
highlighting the most common features. Employing cuttingedge neuroscientific methods, we also report findings on the
neural underpinnings of trance states. Furthermore, we look
into the practical applications of such states in clinical settings.
By bridging subjective experiences, neuroscience, and clinical
relevance, this review enhances our understanding of trance
states and their possible uses.
Addresses
1
Sensation and Perception Research Group, GIGA Consciousness,
University of Liège, Belgium
2
Coma Science Group, GIGA Consciousness, University of Liège,
Belgium
3
Centre du Cerveau2, University Hospital of Liège, Belgium
4
Cognitive and Computational Neuroscience Lab, Psychology
Department, University of Montréal, Montreal, Canada
5
Algology Interdisciplinary Center, University Hospital of Liège, Belgium
Corresponding author: Gosseries, Olivia (ogosseries@uliege.be)

Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400
This review comes from a themed issue on Consciousness on the
Borders of Life and Death
Edited by Gerry Leisman, Amedeo D’Angiulli, Calixto Machado,
Charlotte Martial and Olivia Gosseries
For complete overview of the section, please refer to the article
collection, “Consciousness on the Borders of Life and Death (2023)”
Available online 9 May 2024
Received: 7 November 2023; Revised: 16 March 2024;
Accepted: 21 April 2024
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2024.101400
2352–1546/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

]]

]]
]]]]]]

Introduction
In the realm of modern science, there is a growing in­
terest in trance states to study consciousness and pos­
sibly treat people suffering from various ailments. The
term ‘trance’ has its roots in Latin, coming from ‘tran­
situs’ (a passage) and ‘transire’ (to pass over), suggesting
a transition from one state of consciousness to another,
shifting from an ordinary to a modified state of con­
sciousness. Trance has also been described as an inter­
mediate state between the world of the living and the
world of the dead [1].
Trance states can be induced through various means,
including meditation, hypnotic suggestions, the use of
psychoactive substances, and ritualistic practices.
Shamanic trance is arguably one of the most widely
known and ancient practices in human history. It plays a
central role in the practices of shamans, individuals who
serve as spiritual intermediaries in many indigenous
cultures (Figure 1A). Shamanic trance is often induced
through rhythmic drumming, chanting, or dancing,
sometimes accompanied by drug intake, allowing the
shaman to transcend ordinary reality and enter a world
where they can interact with spirits and energies that are
believed to influence the physical and spiritual wellbeing of individuals and communities. These shamanic
trance experiences are culturally significant and serve as
conduits for guidance, healing, and divination [2]. The
context and setting of a trance ceremony are also care­
fully cultivated and prepared.
Currently, in the Western world, we have witnessed the
development of trance practices that are detached from
traditional rituals (Figure 1B). These practices are
considered to serve personal growth and therapeutic
purposes [3]. These Westernized trance states, most
often derived from shamanic tradition, are achieved
through various trainings that enable participants to
voluntarily induce the trance state. For example, Har­
ner’s method is a structured approach to shamanic
journeying that employs repetitive drumming or rat

☆
Given the role as Guest Editor, Olivia Gosseries had no involvement in the peer review of the article and has no access to information regarding
its peer review. Full responsibility for the editorial process of this article was delegated to Gerry Machado.

www.sciencedirect.com

Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400

2

Consciousness on the Borders of Life and Death

Figure 1

Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences

Trance states seen through the eyes of an artificial intelligence artist (generated by Midjourney). Illustration of traditional shamanic trance (A) and
contemporary Westernized trance (B).

tling to induce a shamanic trance state [4–6]. This
method was developed by Michael Harner, and it en­
ables individuals to explore what may be perceived as
the spirit world to seek advice and insight. It has made
shamanic practices more accessible to a wider audience
and has played a significant role in the resurgence of
interest in shamanism in Western cultures. Another
more recent example of a modernized trance is the
‘auto-induced cognitive trance’ developed by Corine
Sombrun who has been trained in a traditional sha­
manic Mongolian community [7]. This trance state is
initially induced by listening to sound loops featuring
binaural sounds with pure tones and beating rates,
complemented by music and voices. Subsequently,
participants progressively learn to induce trance au­
tonomously via body movements and vocalizations,
without the need for the sound loop.
The next sections will delve into the phenomenology,
neural processes, and clinical applications of trance
states, both in the context of traditional culture and its
Western adaptation. By synthesizing recent research
findings, this multidimensional exploration aims to
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400

provide a holistic comprehension of trance states to offer
guidance to individuals interested in such states.

Phenomenology
Subjective experiences of trance states have been in­
vestigated using various means: free recall, semi­
structured interviews, and standardized and customized
questionnaires. Although different induction techniques
generate different trance experiences, characterized by
different phenomenologies, several common features
can be identified. These encompass alterations in spa­
tiotemporal perception, increased absorption in the ex­
perience, modification in body sensation, shifts in
thoughts, change in the sense of self-agency and own­
ership, intense emotions including a feeling of unity, and
the impression of living a spiritual experience
[5,6,8,9–11]. Some studies also describe complex visual
imagery, uncontrolled bodily movements, decreased
perception of pain, incoherent language, out-of-body
experience, mystical experiences, and ego dissolution
during trance [6,12–14]. Other studies highlight heigh­
tened internal awareness [5,15], while others report
www.sciencedirect.com

www.sciencedirect.com

Case study

Rogerson et al.,
2021 [9]

Group
study

Group
study

Huels et al.,
2021 [6]

SpindolaRodrigues et al.,
2022 [19]

Type of
study

Authors, years

Results

Higher scores for practitioners
compared with controls for complex
imagery, unity experience, spiritual
experience, bliss state, disembodiment,
insight, elemental visual alterations, and
altered perceptions during trance, but
not during classical music. Higher
scores for practitioners during trance
compared with classical music in all
areas above except visual impairments
↑ gamma power, ↓ gamma complexity,
and ↑ low beta criticality in practitioners
during trance, which correlated with
some items on the questionnaire (e.g.,
visual impairments, insight)
1 female practitioner
Trance rating, free recall, and MRI in resting Change in somatosensory sensations, ↑
(Sangoma, traditional
state and trance-inducing visualization task external awareness, ↑ internal
South African healer)
cued by self-selected music
awareness, mental imagery, floating,
rapid fluttering of eyelids, ↑ breathing,
and ecstatic feeling
↑ activation in auditory cortices; right
parietal area, right frontal area, and
prostriata area linked to high trance
perception; orbitofrontal cortex
negatively activated and most correlated
with music when trance was high; trance
perception modulates auditory cortical
signals
19 Brazilian psychophonic Standardized neuropsychological and
Cognitive functioning of these mediums
mediums
mental health tests (at rest)
(who experience dissociative
mediumistic trance) is equal to or above
the norms. Overall cognitive health in
executive functioning, memory,
visuospatial functioning, attention, and
language

Methods

18 shamanic practitioners, Altered State of Consciousness
19 controls matched for
questionnaire and EEG during resting
age and sex
states, cognitive tests, classical music, and
Harner’s shamanic trance (with drum)

Population

Empirical findings of trance published since 2021a. MRI: Magnetic Resonance Imaging, EEG: electroencephalography

Table 1

Small sample size, cross-sectional design,
no emotion, and no thought content
analysis of the trance phenomenon

Single subject

Small sample size, no post hoc test
adjustment, no electromyography,
variability of practice and ritual among
practitioners, controls were passive, while
practitioners were cognitively engaged in
trance condition, no blinding between
experimental conditions or groups

Reported limitations

Trance states exploration Gosseries et al.
3

Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400

Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400

Group
study

Oswald et al.,
2023 [28]

25 participants proficient
in auto-induced cognitive
trance

8 male dang-kis healing
trance practitioners
(Chinese spirit
mediumship)

Population

Cardiac and respiratory signals during
resting state, mental imagery task, and
auto-induced cognitive trance

Open interviews and standardized
psychological questionnaires

Methods

From a search on PubMed. The full article of Wahbeh et al. [22] could not be accessed.

Multiple
case study

Lee and
Kirmayer,
2023 [8]

a

Type of
study

Authors, years

Table 1 (continued )

Small sample size, no longitudinal design,
no interview of assistants, devotees, and
family members

Alterations in consciousness level, ↓
control bodily movements, unintelligible
language, communication with spirits,
amnesia, change in experience of self,
and modification of body perception
during spirit possession trance
Most participants appeared emotionally
stable with internal locus of control,
optimistic, confident, family-oriented,
and sociable; the personality test was
not different from the norm
Therapeutic transformation included
change in identity and social role,
change in self-perception during trance,
and lasting changes in the sense of self
Decrease in cardiac vagal control
leading to a hyperarousal state of the
autonomic nervous system in trance.
More specifically, increased heart rate
and decreased level of high-frequency
heart rate variability with increases in
respiratory amplitude, phase ratio, and
respiration rate variability during trance
compared with the other conditions. No
differences between imagination and
resting state conditions

Small sample size, imbalanced
female–male ratio, no long-term prediction,
no correlation with phenomenology or
brain functions

Reported limitations

Results

4
Consciousness on the Borders of Life and Death

www.sciencedirect.com

Trance states exploration Gosseries et al.

5

increased environmental awareness, with hypersensi­
tivity to light, smells, and sounds [9].

[23], while others failed to confirm the presence of any
differences in electrical brain activity during trance [24].

Some participants in such trance states also report
communicating with disembodied entities or deceased
people, as described in an online survey examining
subjective experiences, mental health parameters, per­
sonality traits, and the influence of trance on 83 expert
participants [16]. These types of trances are generally
referred to as mediumistic trances or trance channeling
and consist of being connected to a source of information
inaccessible in the ordinary state of consciousness
[16,17]. The individual’s body is considered a channel of
communication, and in some cases, the individual re­
ports even being possessed by the communicating en­
tity, a process known as incorporation or possession
trance. Communication with spirits through the med­
ium’s spoken voice is referred to as psychophony,
whereas psychography involves the transcription of
messages from spirits by the medium’s hand [18].

Second, using single pulses transcranial magnetic sti­
mulation combined with EEG in a case report of autoinduced cognitive trance, an increase in the amplitude of
the evoked potentials (generated by the pulses) was
measured during frontal stimulations in trance compared
with the ordinary state of consciousness [10]. In contrast,
decreased responses were measured during parietal sti­
mulations. These results suggest a brain target–specific
dissociation in trance.

Although these experiences are unusual, recent work
indicates that individuals experiencing these trance
states are typically in good physical and mental health
[8,16,17,19]. They do not seem to exhibit mental dis­
orders as defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, nor do they seem to suffer
from anxiety or depression [8,16,17,19].
The collective phenomenological attributes that man­
ifest across diverse trance experiences pave the way for
an exploration of the underlying brain correlates that
give rise to such phenomena.

Brain imaging and (neuro)physiology
To date, only a few studies have used electro­
encephalography (EEG), functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), or single-photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) to document the effect of trance
on brain function. The majority of these studies em­
ployed EEG in single case reports and small group
samples. Trance induction methods were based on dif­
ferent traditions and practices, such as Harner’s sha­
manic
trance,
auto-induced
cognitive
trance,
mediumistic trance, and possession trance.
Several observations can be drawn from these pioneering
works. First, the majority of the studies report that
electrical brain activity is modified when participants are
in trance, regardless of the type of trances. For example,
trance, as compared with ordinary states of conscious­
ness, has been associated with an increase in alpha and
theta rhythms [14,20,21], as well as an increase in gamma
[6,22] and beta band power and connectivity
[6,12,21,22]. Some researchers have observed a decrease
in alpha rhythms during trance induced by drum beats
www.sciencedirect.com

Third, one fMRI study revealed increased connectivity
in the anterior and posterior cingulate cortices and the
left insula, as well as decreased connectivity within au­
ditory cortices during the Harner’s trance in 15 experi­
enced shamanic practitioners [5]. Another fMRI study
reported increased connectivity between the auditory
and somatosensory cortices and increased activation in
the occipital, temporal, posterior cingulate, and orbito­
frontal regions during trance in 8 spiritual mediums [11].
Similar activation in the auditory cortex, along with ac­
tivation in the parietal and frontal cortices as well as in
area prostriata, was found in a case study during a tra­
ditional trance process [9]. This latter study was the first
to establish a direct correlation between fMRI signal
fluctuations and the expert subject’s perception of trance
onset and intensity, thereby exploring the dynamics as­
sociated with the trance state.
Finally, SPECT recordings have shown a significant
decrease in cortical and subcortical metabolism (in­
cluding the culmen, hippocampus, anterior cingulate,
occipital, temporal, and precentral gyri) during mediu­
mistic trances in 10 psychographers [25].
Although some of these results seem somewhat contra­
dictory, altogether, they suggest a modification of brain
processes during trance. Notably, these changes appear
to partly occur in the sensory cortices, which may be
linked to the particular subjective experience, including
auditory, visual, and kinesthetic perceptions. Some of
these results are similar, while others are different from
what has been previously reported in other nonordinary
states of consciousness, including hypnosis [26], medi­
tation [27], and psychedelic use [6].
One recent study investigated cardiorespiratory func­
tions during auto-induced cognitive trance in 25 parti­
cipants. Participants exhibited increased heart rate,
reduced high-frequency heart rate variability, and in­
creased amplitude and variability in respiratory signals
during trance state compared with ordinary states of
consciousness [28]. These findings indicate that autoinduced cognitive trance is linked to a reduced para­
sympathetic activity, suggesting a hyperarousal state of
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400

6

Consciousness on the Borders of Life and Death

Box 1 Clearing the terminological fog in trance research.
Terminology within consciousness research is often poorly defined, necessitating urgent clarification. For instance, terms like ‘altered state of
consciousness,’ ‘modified state of consciousness,’ and ‘nonordinary state of consciousness’ are used interchangeably or distinctively by different
researchers. The term ‘trance’ itself is an umbrella concept, encompassing a wide array of experiences that vary across ethnicities, sociocultural
contexts, traditions, communities, and even among individuals. Recognizing the unique nature of each trance experience is crucial. However, the
terminology related to trance is currently inconsistent, with some referring to it as a state (as we do here) and others as a process. This discrepancy
extends to related concepts such as neoshamanism, channeling, possession, and mediumnic/mediumistic/mediumship trances, shamanic
healing, shamanic journey, among others. The use of these terms strongly varies among scholars, and various methods of induction, practices,
and contexts further add to the complexity of trance research.
These challenges highlight the need for well-defined and standardized terms, particularly regarding the specific types of trance, practices,
methods of induction, and contextual frameworks. Improving terminology is of utmost importance for several reasons. First, it promotes precision
by providing a standardized language for expressing complex ideas, reducing the risk of misinterpretation. Second, standardized terminology
enhances the clarity of scientific communication, facilitating the understanding of research findings, and encouraging effective collaboration
between peers. Third, it ensures the reproducibility of scientific experiments and results, which is a critical requirement in our field. Moreover,
terminology also serves as the common language of scientific literature, allowing researchers to build on existing knowledge, form scientific
theories, and integrate new discoveries into existing frameworks. Furthermore, it enables researchers from different domains to communicate
effectively. Finally, in clinical contexts, adherence to specific terminology is crucial for compliance with safety standards and regulations. In sum,
refining terminology will play an indispensable role in advancing this nascent scientific research.

the autonomic nervous system in trance. Note that the
participants remained motionless in both trance and or­
dinary state of consciousness conditions [28].
Table 1 summarizes the experimental findings on phe­
nomenology, cognition, and neurophysiological functions
published since 2021. Undoubtedly, these preliminary
observations necessitate further validation in larger sam­
ples with more robust methodologies. While diverse
trance types stem from distinct induction procedures,
they lay the groundwork for upcoming research. In the
forthcoming years, integrating phenomenology and brain
imaging promises to refine our understanding of these
trance states from a neurophenomenological perspective,
potentially unlocking their therapeutic applications.

Potential clinical applications
While investigating the neurophysiological mechanisms
of trance states is essential for advancing our compre­
hension of these phenomena, it is equally important to
examine the potential therapeutic effects of such trance
states. Intriguingly, a noteworthy phenomenon unfolds
daily: an increasing number of patients are seeking nonpharmacological complementary approaches to address
their health concerns. This surge highlights the need for
patients to actively engage in their own healthcare and
reclaim a sense of responsibility for their well-being.
These mind–body tools, which may be hypnosis, med­
itation, yoga, or other practices, empower individuals to
regain control and autonomy in the management of their
quality of life [29].
Currently, there is only limited empirical evidence on
the clinical and therapeutic efficacy of trance practices.
The effect of Harner’s shamanic trance combined with
Ingerman’s technique of ‘soul retrieval’ [30] was eval­
uated in 23 females with temporomandibular pain. Par­
ticipants self-reported decreases in temporomandibular
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400

pain perception and its functional impact after 5 sessions
[31], and these improvements persisted for 9 months
[32]. Participants also reported improved sleep, in­
creased energy levels, and enhanced immune and di­
gestive systems [33]. Harner’s shamanic trance was also
studied in 4 veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder
who completed 7 or 8 sessions. All participants reported
improved quality of life, while 3 patients also reported
decreases in symptoms and enhanced spiritual wellbeing (abilities to stay in the present, accept the in­
explicable, and uncertainties) [34]. Another study on 15
participants with life-threatening illness and terminal
prognosis (e.g., acquired immunodeficiency syndrome,
cancer) reported that shamanic-based intervention (in­
cluding drum sounds, soul retrieval, and power animal)
helped them enhance their ability to take an active role
in their life despite the illness, receive a guidance in the
form of an animal accompanying the individual, and feel
a sense of embodiment to regain a place in the world
[35]. Finally, the therapeutic effects of possession trance
‘Dang-ki’ from Chinese tradition were investigated in 21
participants who had physical issues (hypertension,
chronic pain, and gastric problems) or psychosocial pro­
blems (depression and sleep disorders) [36]. In this
context, the ‘Dang-ki’ experts went into trance to heal
the patients. Eleven patients found the intervention
helpful, 4 considered it beneficial but were unable to
follow the recommendations, 5 were uncertain about its
utility, and 1 deemed it useless. Various observations
were reported, such as improvement in physical issues
(e.g., pain reduction and increased energy), cognitive
and emotional aspects (e.g., calmness, relief, and hope),
interpersonal interactions (e.g., conflict avoidance), and
spiritual beliefs (e.g., sense of divine strength). The
experts practicing the ‘Dang-ki’ trance for these parti­
cipants also described positive therapeutic effects for
themselves, in which the embodied experience of self
seems to have played a central role [8].
www.sciencedirect.com

Trance states exploration Gosseries et al.

These preliminary results appear to yield positive out­
comes, both in terms of physical benefits (e.g., reduced
functional pain) and psychological well-being (e.g., im­
proved quality of life and restoration of agency despite
illness). Nevertheless, these findings only stem from case
studies and small cohort studies that have methodological
limitations, including the absence of control groups or
placebo conditions, a lack of uniformity in the proposed
practices, no statistical analysis, and a dearth of standar­
dized and objective measures to examine the clinical ef­
fects. Moreover, the types of trance explored thus far are
heterogeneous, as are the investigated patient popula­
tions. Future research endeavors must therefore prioritize
rigorous protocols, including adding a placebo condition
or a control group, for such interventions.

The path forward
Both ancestral and modern traditions share the common
denominator of using music and rhythm-based se­
quences to bring the individual into trance. The role of
music thus deserves future in-depth research. For in­
stance, one could compare the changes in phenomen­
ological experience and brain activity associated with
exposure to different sound loops (e.g., loops supposed
to induce trance states compared with loops that do not
induce such state) [37].
The potential integration of trance practices into patient
care understandably faces a high degree of skepticism
and caution within the scientific and medical commu­
nities. While some institutions have already embraced
the use of other nonordinary states of consciousness such
as hypnosis and meditation in their clinical routine (e.g.,
hypnosedation [38] and mindfulness-based interventions
[39]), others remain watchful, seeking convincing evi­
dence of their tangible benefits for patients [40]. It is our
responsibility as scientific researchers to develop diligent
protocols to provide valuable results. Ongoing clinical
trials, such as those conducted by Gregoire and collea­
gues in oncology [41] , hold great promise in this regard.
With the aid of state-of-the-art technology and brain
imaging, combined with phenomenological measure­
ments, we will also be able to refine our understanding
of trance experiences and their underlying mechanisms.
However, these high-tech tools do not yet offer the ca­
pacity to capture and comprehend all the phenomena
experienced during trance states, such as feelings of
communion with the universe or intense dissociation.
Collaborations between various disciplines, such as
neuroscience, anthropology, sociology, psychology, and
philosophy, are thus warranted. These collaborations
should be coupled with the imperative to standardize
terminology (as outlined in Box 1) to more precisely
define and characterize trance states. This combined
effort will not only enrich our research but also con­
tribute to the future of this field, allowing us to
www.sciencedirect.com

7

synthesize how trance relates to theoretical frameworks
of brain function and well-being.

Conclusion
In this short paper, we have reviewed recent research on
trance states, from their historical roots in traditional
shamanic practices to their contemporary evolution in
the Western world. Scientific research into the trance
phenomenon is relatively recent, with an emerging in­
terest in investigating its neurophenomenology and
clinical applications. In a society where people are in­
creasingly searching for meaning (the meaning of life
and death, the meaning of symptoms and illnesses), the
practice of trance may play an important role in enabling
people to harness their intrinsic mental, emotional, and
psychological resources, including resilience and coping
mechanisms. This proactive approach may empower
individuals to enhance their overall well-being and as­
sume greater control over their lives. Our role, whether
as clinicians or researchers, is to be able to offer accurate
information to caregivers and patients alike regarding
the efficacy of these tools and the context in which their
use is relevant. Future studies combining neurophysio­
logical and phenomenological measurements will be an
important step toward understanding the processes un­
derlying these trance states and, therefore, a more ac­
curate application in the clinical management of
patients.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Olivia Gosseries: Conceptualization, Funding acquisi­
tion, Writing – original draft. Nolwenn Marie: Writing –
review & editing. Yannick Lafon: Writing – review &
editing. Aminata Bicego: Writing – review & editing.
Charlotte Grégoire: Writing – review & editing. Victor
Oswald: Writing – review & editing. Audrey
Vanhaudenhuyse: Conceptualization, Funding acquisi­
tion, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted
technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work, the first author used
a Language quality checker by Springer Nature and
ChatGPT to improve language and readability, as well as
Midjourney for illustrative purpose (figure). After using
these tools/services, the authors reviewed and edited the
content as needed and took full responsibility for the
content of the publication.

Data Availability
No data were used for the research described in the ar­
ticle.
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400

8

Consciousness on the Borders of Life and Death

Declaration of Competing Interest
None.

Acknowledgements
The study was supported by the University and University Hospital of
Liege, the Belgian National Funds for Scientific Research (FRS-FNRS),
the BIAL Foundation, the MIS FNRS (F.4521.23), the fund Generet, the
King Baudouin Foundation, the Televie Foundation, the Belgium
Foundation Against Cancer (Grants Number 2017064 and C/2020/1357),
the ERA-Net FLAG-ERA JTC2021 project ModelDXConsciousness
(Human Brain Project Partnering Project), the Mind Science Foundation,
the European Commission, the Fondation Leon Fredericq, and Wallonia as
part of a program of the BioWin Health 619 Cluster framework. NM is a
research fellow, CG is a postdoctoral fellow, and OG is a research associate
at FRS-FNRS.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have
been highlighted as:
•• of special interest
1.

Hunter J: Music and altered states of consciousness in
shamanismand spirit possession : an overview of the literature. in
Paracoustics: Sound & the Paranormal, CE Cooper, ST Parsons,
Editors; 2015.

2.

Greene S: The shaman’s needle: development, shamanic
agency, and intermedicality in Aguaruna Lands, Peru. Am
Ethnol 1998, 25:634-658.

3.

Wallis RJ: Queer shamans: autoarchaeology and neoshamanism. World Archaeol 2000, 32:252-262.

4.

Harner S.: Immune and affect response to shamanic drumming.
ETD Collection for Fordham; 1995.

5.

Hove MJ, Stelzer J, Nierhaus T, Thiel SD, Gundlach C, Margulies
DS, Van Dijk KR, Turner R, Keller PE, Merker B: Brain network
reconfiguration and perceptual decoupling during an
absorptive state of consciousness. Cereb Cortex 2016,
26:3116-3124.

6.
•

Huels ER, Kim H, Lee U, Bel-Bahar T, Colmenero AV, Nelson A,
Blain-Moraes S, Mashour GA, Harris RE: Neural correlates of the
shamanic state of consciousness. Front Hum Neurosci 2021,
15:610466.
This paper characterizes shamanic trance state in 24 shamanic practi­
tioners using high-density EEG and shows that it has unique brain-re­
lated changes compared to previous literature investigating the
psychedelic state.
7.

Grégoire C, Sombrun C, Gosseries O, Vanhaudenhuyse A: Selfinduced cognitive trance: characteristics and potential
therapeutic applications. Hegel 2021, 2:192-201.

8.

Lee BO, Kirmayer LJ: Spirit mediumship and mental health:
therapeutic self-transformation among dang-kis in Singapore.
Cult Med Psychiatry 2023, 47:271-300.

9.
•

Rogerson RG, Barnstaple RE, DeSouza JF: Neural correlates of a
trance process and alternative states of consciousness in a
traditional healer. Brain Sci 2021, 11:497.
This paper is the first study to directly correlate fMRI BOLD signal var­
iations in an expert subject ’ s percept of trance onset and intensity,
providing insight into the neural signature and dynamics of trance state.
10. Gosseries O, Fecchio M, Wolff A, Sanz LRD, Sombrun C,
Vanhaudenhuyse A, Laureys S: Behavioural and brain responses
in cognitive trance: a TMS-EEG case study. Clin Neurophysiol
2020, 131:586-588.
11. Mainieri AG, Peres JFP, Moreira-Almeida A, Mathiak K, Habel U,
Kohn N: Neural correlates of psychotic-like experiences during
spiritual-trance state. Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging 2017,
266:101-107.
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400

12. Flor-Henry P, Shapiro Y, Sombrun C: Brain changes during a
shamanic trance: altered modes of consciousness,
hemispheric laterality, and systemic psychobiology. Cogent
Psychol 2017, 4.
13. Martial C, Simon J, Puttaert N, Gosseries O, Charland-Verville V,
Nyssen AS, Greyson B, Laureys S, Cassol H: The near-death
experience content (NDE-C) scale: development and
psychometric validation. Conscious Cogn 2020, 86:103049.
14. Park JR, Yagyu T, Saito N, Kinoshita T, Hirai T: Dynamics of brain
electric field during recall of Salpuri dance performance.
Percept Mot Skills 2002, 95:955-962.
15. Gingras B, Pohler G, Fitch WT: Exploring shamanic journeying:
repetitive drumming with shamanic instructions induces
specific subjective experiences but no larger cortisol decrease
than instrumental meditation music. PLoS One 2014, 9:e102103.
16. Wahbeh H, Butzer B: Characteristics of English-speaking trance
•
channelers. Explore 2020, 16:304-309.
This online survey explores subjective experiences, mental health fac­
tors, personality characteristics, and the impact of channeling on 83
participants who self-identified as trance channelers.
17. Pederzoli L, Tressoldi P, Wahbeh H: Channeling: a nonpathological possession and dissociative identity experience
or something else? Cult Med Psychiatry 2022, 46:161-169.
18. Lafon Y, Grégoire C, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Gosseries O: De la
transe chamanique, à la transe cognitive: revue de la littérature
et approche biopsychosociale. In Le Deuil et les Dimensions
Invisibles de la Conscience. Edited by S.M. Josse E. SATAS; 2022.
19. Spindola-Rodrigues KC, Reis RC, de Carvalho CM, de Siqueira S,
•
da Rocha Neto AV, Almeida KJ: Cognitive health and differential
cortical functioning in dissociative trance: an explorative study
about mediumship. Front Psychol 2022, 13:874720.
This study evaluates the cognitive functioning of 19 subjects practicing
trance mediumship in Brazil.
20. Oohashi T, Kawai N, Honda M, Nakamura S, Morimoto M, Nishina
E, Maekawa T: Electroencephalographic measurement of
possession trance in the field. Clin Neurophysiol 2002,
113:435-445.
21. Kawai N, Honda M, Nishina E, Yagi R, Oohashi T:
Electroencephalogram characteristics during possession
trances in healthy individuals. Neuroreport 2017, 28:949-955.
22. Wahbeh H, Cannard C, Kriegsman M, Delorme A: Evaluating brain
spectral and connectivity differences between silent mindwandering and trance states. Prog Brain Res 2023, 277:29-61.
23. Konopacki M, Madison G: EEG responses to shamanic
drumming. Does the suggestion of trance state moderate the
strength of frequency components? J Sleep Sleep Disord Res
2018, 1:16-25.
24. Wahbeh H, Cannard C, Okonsky J, Delorme A: A physiological
examination of perceived incorporation during trance.
F1000Res 2019, 8:67.
25. Peres JF, Moreira-Almeida A, Caixeta L, Leao F, Newberg A:
Neuroimaging during trance state: a contribution to the study
of dissociation. PLoS One 2012, 7:e49360.
26. Wolf TG, Faerber KA, Rummel C, Halsband U, Campus G:
Functional changes in brain activity using hypnosis: a
systematic review. Brain Sci 2022, 12.
27. Weder BJ: Mindfulness in the focus of the neurosciences — the
contribution of neuroimaging to the understanding of
mindfulness. Front Behav Neurosci 2022, 16:928522.
28. Oswald V, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Annen J, Martial C, Bicego A,
•
Rousseaux F, Sombrun C, Harel Y, Faymonville ME, Laureys S,
et al.: Autonomic nervous system modulation during selfinduced non-ordinary states of consciousness. Sci Rep 2023,
13:15811.
This is the first study investigating cardiorespiratory changes during
auto-induced cognitive trance in 25 participants.
29. Franco Corso SJ, O’Malley KY, Subaiya S, Mayall D, Dakwar E: The
•
role of non-ordinary states of consciousness occasioned by
www.sciencedirect.com

Trance states exploration Gosseries et al.

mind-body practices in mental health illness. J Affect Disord
2023, 335:166-176.
This review identifies studies of nonordinary states of consciousness
induced by mind–body practices (e.g., meditation and yoga) and eval­
uates their effects in treating mental health disorders.

9

36. Lee BO, Kirmayer LJ, Groleau D: Therapeutic processes and
perceived helpfulness of dang-ki (Chinese shamanism) from
the symbolic healing perspective. Cult Med Psychiatry 2010,
34:56-105.

30. Ingerman S: Soul Retrieval: Mending the Fragmented Self. Harper
Collins; 2011.

37. Lanzilotti C, Dumas R, Grassi M, Schön D: Prolonged exposure to
highly rhythmic music affects brain dynamics and perception.
Neuropsychologia 2019, 129:191-199.

31. Vuckovic NH, Gullion CM, Williams LA, Ramirez M, Schneider J:
Feasibility and short-term outcomes of a shamanic treatment
for temporomandibular joint disorders. Alter Ther Health Med
2007, 13:18-29.

38. Vanhaudenhuyse A, Nyssen A, Faymonville M: Recent insight on
how the neuroscientific approach helps clinicians. OBM Integr
Complement Med 2020, 5:028.

32. Vuckovic NH, Williams LA, Schneider J, Ramirez M, Gullion CM:
Long-term outcomes of shamanic treatment for
temporomandibular joint disorders. Perm J 2012, 16:28-35.

39. Trapani S, Caglioni M, Villa G, Manara DF, Caruso R: Mindfulnessbased interventions during pregnancy and long-term effects on
postpartum depression and maternal mental health: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. J Integr Complement Med 2023, 30:107-120.

33. Vuckovic N, Schneider J, Williams LA, Ramirez M: Journey into
healing: the transformative experience of shamanic healing on
women with temporomandibular joint disorders. Explore 2010,
6:371-379.
34. Wahbeh H, Shainsky L, Weaver A, Engels-Smith J: Shamanic
healing for veterans with PTSD: a case series. Explore 2017,
13:207-217.
35. Krycka KC: Shamanic practices and the treatment of lifethreatening medical conditions. J Transpers Psychol 2000,
32:69-87.

www.sciencedirect.com

40. Vanhaudenhuyse A: When science takes an interest in
techniques inherited from traditional practices. Hegel 2023,82.
41. Gregoire C, Marie N, Sombrun C, Faymonville ME, Kotsou I, van
Nitsen V, de Ribaucourt S, Jerusalem G, Laureys S,
Vanhaudenhuyse A, Gosseries O: Hypnosis, meditation, and selfinduced cognitive trance to improve post-treatment
oncological patients’ quality of life: study protocol. Front
Psychol 2022, 13:807741.

Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2024, 58:101400

