healthcare
Review

Possible Mechanisms for the Effects of Sound Vibration on
Human Health
Lee Bartel 1, * and Abdullah Mosabbir 1,2
1
2

*



Citation: Bartel, L.; Mosabbir, A.

Faculty of Music, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S2C5, Canada; amosabbir@research.baycrest.org
Baycrest Health Sciences Centre, Rotman Research Institute, Toronto, ON M6A2E1, Canada
Correspondence: lbartel@chass.utoronto.ca

Abstract: This paper presents a narrative review of research literature to ŌĆ£map the landscapeŌĆØ of the
mechanisms of the effect of sound vibration on humans including the physiological, neurological,
and biochemical. It begins by narrowing music to sound and sound to vibration. The focus is on low
frequency sound (up to 250 Hz) including infrasound (1ŌĆō16 Hz). Types of application are described
and include whole body vibration, vibroacoustics, and focal applications of vibration. Literature
on mechanisms of response to vibration is categorized into hemodynamic, neurological, and musculoskeletal. Basic mechanisms of hemodynamic effects including stimulation of endothelial cells
and vibropercussion; of neurological effects including protein kinases activation, nerve stimulation
with a specific look at vibratory analgesia, and oscillatory coherence; of musculoskeletal effects
including muscle stretch reflex, bone cell progenitor fate, vibration effects on bone ossification and
resorption, and anabolic effects on spine and intervertebral discs. In every category research on
clinical applications are described. The conclusion points to the complexity of the field of vibrational
medicine and calls for specific comparative research on type of vibration delivery, amount of body or
surface being stimulated, effect of specific frequencies and intensities to specific mechanisms, and to
greater interdisciplinary cooperation and focus.

Possible Mechanisms for the Effects
of Sound Vibration on Human Health.
Healthcare 2021, 9, 597.

Keywords: vibration; whole body vibration; vibroacoustic therapy; physioacoustic; hemodynamic;
neurological; musculoskeletal; music as vibration; music and health

https://doi.org/10.3390/
healthcare9050597
Academic Editor:
Jos├® Carmelo Adsuar
Received: 31 March 2021
Accepted: 10 May 2021
Published: 18 May 2021

PublisherŌĆÖs Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: ┬® 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

1. Introduction
Music has the power to affect our health and wellbeing. This belief and related cultural
practice has been evident throughout history [1,2], but the clinical profession of music
therapy is only some 75 years old. As a field of practice music therapy has been described
as an art and a science and regards to science its research foundation has drawn on
psychoanalytic, humanistic, and behavioral traditions [3]. As an emergent practice within
the healthcare context, the focus of music therapy (a therapeutic relationship employing
music as a means) and music medicine (the music or sound itself as the therapeutic)
research has been primarily evidence-based. Mechanisms of effect have received little
attention until recently. To develop clinical and scientific legitimacy in general healthcare
and expand its use as standard of care, research on the use of music must show both that it
works (evidence-based research) and why it works (mechanism-based research).
Part of the problem of creating a scientific foundation for music effects in healthcare
is that music is a very complex phenomenon; to control its parameters scientifically is
practically impossible. That is, if music is approached as ŌĆ£musicŌĆØŌĆöa cognitively constructed product of a culturally situated acoustic phenomenaŌĆöthe variables that can affect
a response are practically limitless. Efforts to provide more detailed reporting of the music
used in research are a start [4]. However, another approach is to define the potential level
of the response mechanism.

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare9050597

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/healthcare

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

2 of 35

1.1. Basic Concepts
1.1.1. Mechanism
Focusing on the mechanism itself can be highly complex. Craver and Bechtel [5]
describe four dimensions of mechanisms: (1) a phenomenal dimensionŌĆöa mechanism
does things. For music the human ear offers a basic mechanism illustration. The ear
translates compression and decompression of air molecules into the conscious perception
of sound. (2) A componential dimensionŌĆöa mechanism has components. In a simplified
description the ear has components including the ear drum, the malleus, incus, stapes, and
cochlea that transmit the vibration to the cilia which translate the physical vibration to
an electrical signal for the auditory nerve. (3) A causal dimensionŌĆöcomponents interact
to make the phenomenon happen. The components of the ear turn the air compressions
into electrical signals transmitted through the auditory nerve to the internal perceptual
processing system (a complex mechanism in itself). (4) An organizational dimensionŌĆö
components are organized in space and time. There is a particular organization of the
components of the ear and how they interact that causes vibration to be perceived as sound.
The basic question of what are the mechanisms of how people enjoy music illustrates
a very important aspect of the challenge of studying mechanismsŌĆöthe ear is essential
in the perception of music but it is only a start to the understanding of the cascade of
mechanisms or causes of music enjoyment. That understanding would involve further
definition of the auditory nuclei in the brainstem, the role and function of the thalamus, the
means of transmission to the auditory cortex, the role of memory in the perceptual process,
the interaction of expectation with neurotransmitters like dopamine and their role in the
perceived response, and so on. Similarly, the question of how does low frequency sound
stimulates blood circulation leads to an examination of endothelial cell response resulting
in nitric oxide release and its effect on blood flow and so on.
The crucial point here, and an important caveat for this paper, is that research into
the mechanisms of the effect of music on health is nascent and in most cases focused on
the most obvious components of what can be presumed to be a complex system [6,7]. This
paper will, therefore, attempt to point in the direction of potential mechanisms that appear
to be emerging for further study rather than serve as a detailed explication of a set of
defined mechanisms.
1.1.2. Types of Stimulus and Response
A starting point to study mechanisms is to try to categorize by type of stimulus and
type of response. One of the difficult pivots in the thinking of many health researchers
is to differentiate between ŌĆ£musicŌĆØ and ŌĆ£sound vibrationŌĆØ as the stimulus. The bulk of
research by cognitive neuroscientists focuses on ŌĆ£musicŌĆØ and often with little control of
the parameters of that music since the assumption is that the effect stems only from the
cognitive processing of that music [8,9].
Within the broad category of ŌĆ£musicŌĆØ as stimulus, the response focus can be on the
general effects like arousal, mood, emotion, relaxation, stress, etc., and with the assumption
that these responses result from enjoyment or aversion reactions, memory associations,
or some inherent neurological process [8]. All of these responses can be attributed to
learned schemas, processes, and associations developed through socially mediated cultural
immersion from the very earliest days of exposure to music [10].
A second category of mechanisms within ŌĆ£musicŌĆØ is to look at the effect of music
cognition on the activation of neural circuits and specific neural functions. This has been
most clearly defined in relation to rehabilitation [11,12].
When music or audible sound is considered for its vibratory (rhythmicity) effects, a
third category of response mechanism emerges and its focus becomes primarily cellular [10].
The most basic and oldest use of vibratory effect is the mechanical ŌĆ£shakingŌĆØ of the body
and more recently specific areas and cells. Another more specific category of cellular
response is the effect of driving a neural modulatory response. The importance of rhythmic
brain activity, and the potential for sensory stimulation to drive it, has not received much

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

3 of 35

attention until recently [13,14]. However, for music as a vibratory phenomenon this is an
important mechanism to study.
1.1.3. Vibratory Rhythmicity
Fundamental to vibratory effects is the rhythmicity of music. It can be thought of as
events per second and seconds per event [15]. When there are more than 16 events per
second cognitive event fusion changes from individual event perception to hearing pitch
frequencies. The rhythmic stimulation effect on cells, however, continues to be related to
the events per second even, for example, at 40 or 60 events per second (Hz). If the events are
slower than about 10 s per event, long-term memory may allow perception as functional
units of musical form but these will not be heard as individual events. Body rhythm
cycles, like the 10 s baroreceptor control loop, may still be response to entrainment by
recurring events at this frequency and influence these Mayer waves to release endothelial
derived nitric oxide [16]. Between 16 events per second and 10 s per event lies the area
where short-term memory allows cognitive perception of the individual events as notes,
patterns, or melodic groupings. In this category people align physical movement like
running, walking, dancing, foot or finger tapping, or mental tracking with the beat. This
category of cognitively tracked rhythmicity has known effects of neural, cardiac, and breath
entrainment and is used therapeutically, for example, in rhythmic auditory stimulation
(RAS) [11]. However, it also has direct effects on cells through mechanical movement.
This paper will not focus on music as ŌĆ£musicŌĆØ; it will focus exclusively on the rhythmicity of music and sound as vibration. In many cases the focus is on the effect of single
frequencies although these frequencies may be imbedded in music and heard by the
recipient simply as music.
1.2. Vibratory Applications to Health
1.2.1. Historic Predicates
It is common to encounter studies of the effect of vibration and low frequency sound
in industrial-oriented research. These studies typically focus on the potentially negative
effects of specific work environments, use of particular equipment, and primarily exposure
to low frequency vibration and noise [17,18]. However, there is also a long history of
interest in the positive effects of vibration. Carriage rides on rough cobblestones came to
be associated with positive health effects and mechanical ŌĆ£chairsŌĆØ emulating these rides
were created. In the 18th century the Abb├®de St. Pierre created the tr├® moussoir or fauteuil
de poste as a vibrating chair to help patients with melancholia, liver disease, and other
conditions that seemed to respond to carriage rides [19]. The 19th century saw considerable
interest in vibration and the development of vibrating tools including the chair created by
Dr. J├®gu after seeing ParkinsonŌĆÖs disease (PD) symptoms calmed by a carriage ride [19,20].
Dr. Jean-Martin Charcot, the most noted neurologist of that century, began studying PD
with the chair but acknowledged an earlier physician, M. Vigoroux, who in 1878 used a
sounding box with a very large attached tuning fork played with a bow to successfully treat
patients with hemianesthesia and locomotor ataxia [21]. Charcot also described treatment
of neuraglia and migraines by Dr. Boudet of Paris with tuning forks mounted on small
boards. Gilles de la Tourette, CharcotŌĆÖs assistant, applied the idea of vibration therapy to
the brain [19ŌĆō21] with a metal helmet he devised with a motor on top causing the helmet
to vibrate at 10Hz. It was found to have a positive effect on insomnia, migraines, and
depression and other vague conditions [21].
1.2.2. Current Therapeutic Application Concepts for Vibration
Whole body vibration (WBV), also referred to as whole body periodic acceleration
(WBPA) is one type of application that grew out of the 18th and 19th century interest
in vibration. WBV, a mechanical vibration typically created with stand-on oscillating
platforms, developed largely in response to concerns about the effect of weightlessness in
space on bone and muscle and then was quickly applied in sports [22]. Although current

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

4 of 35

WBV platforms can produce vibration frequencies up to 100 Hz, frequencies below 30 Hz
are most commonly used. The past 20 years has seen growing interest in the effects of WBV
on bone density, orthopaedic, and neurological concerns [23,24].
More in keeping with the early uses of tuning forks for sensory stimulation is the
practice of low frequency sound therapy (and most closely related to music therapy) that
has developed in the past 50 years and is now commonly known as vibroacoustic therapy
(VAT). WBV typically uses frequencies below 30 Hz while VAT uses 30ŌĆō120 Hz. Olav
Skille in Norway and Petri Lehikoinen in Finland were the leaders in this use of sinusoidal
sound to stimulate the body for therapeutic purposes. Skille placed particular emphasis on
single pitches at 40, 52, 68, and 86 Hz modulated with a steady rise and fall of amplitude
at a rate of about 6.8 s from peak to peak. A noteworthy application of this method in
research was done by Wigram [25,26]. Instead of single frequencies, Lehikoinen used
constant frequency scanning with the intent to treat muscles at their particular resonance
frequency, slow power pulsation to prevent muscle contraction, and at times directional
movement of the sound [27]. Lehikoinen developed the NextWave chair system that was
Federal Drug Administration (FDA) and British Standards Institution (BSI) approved in
1996 for three claims related to physioacoustic therapy: increased blood and lymphatic
circulation, decreased pain and stress, and increased muscle relaxation and mobility [28].
Numerous devices that include chairs, chair backs, beds, mats, pillows, backpacks, and
smaller hand-held units have been developed since then.
1.3. Definitions, Clarifications, and Terminology
1.3.1. Source of Pulsed Stimulation: Sound Waves or Mechanical Compression
To review the literature related to vibration, one of the fundamental questions requiring clarification is whether the stimulation of the body with sound waves is different in
some way from mechanical vibration. Since people hear sound waves and feel mechanical
vibrations, an easy conclusion is that the two are categorically different. However, sound
in essence is mechanical vibration that transmits through a medium [29]. In the medium of
air, the sound actuator creates a vibration that results in regular compressions and decompressions of air molecules that travel to the receiving surface on the body such as the earŌĆÖs
tympanic membrane or the mechanoreceptors in the skin. In water a rapidly oscillating
membrane would create compressions and decompressions of water molecules. Once in
contact with the body, the compression and decompression of the surface of the body is
transmitted through bone and tissue and may be sensed by a set of mechanoreceptors or
by our auditory system.
At a cellular or molecular level in the body there is probably no difference between
activation by air molecules applying regular sine wave pressure on the body, by a surface
applying oscillatory pressure stemming from a rotating motor shaft, or by the body itself
moving against gravity on an oscillating platform. Another way to understand this can be
in comparing the application of sound to produce vibration and the application of vibration
to produce sound. Sound, which propagates through a material can vibrate the material
and be physically felt like a massage, such as in a vibroacoustic device [30]. Mechanical
vibration can also produce sound. Bone conduction headphones are commercially available
and are built to be positioned along the skull. The mechanical vibration of the bones of the
skull propagate to the inner ear and are perceived as sound [31]. Therefore, the interchange
of sound and mechanical vibration demonstrate that they are in essence the same thing.
1.3.2. Vocabulary and Inclusion
Clarification is needed about the vocabulary used in this field. We have already explained VAT and WBV. Another term used is rhythmic sensory stimulation (RSS) and is
inclusive of multiple types of pulsed (rhythmic) stimulation. RSS includes whole body
rhythmic movement, vibrotactile stimulation of all or part of the body, auditory pulses
delivered as individual sound units (like hits on a drum, plucks of a string, interaction
ŌĆ£wavesŌĆØ resulting from binaural detunement, or isochronous amplitude modulated sound

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

5 of 35

trains) or as molecular compressions that create continuous sound (research usually focusing on low frequency sound 20ŌĆō130 Hz), and visual light flashes or flicker. Pulsed
ultrasound can also be regarded as a type of vibrational mechanical stimulation and is
typically applied in 2 ms bursts but with varying ratios of sound to silence from 1:1 (250 Hz)
to 1:20 (45 Hz).
When considering the use of rhythmic pulses to stimulate to the body, one question is
whether electric stimulation and pulsed ultrasound are comparable to mechanical vibration.
Bartel et al. [32] drew parallels between pulsation frequencies used in electric stimulation
and pulsed ultrasound with frequencies for VAT. Many years ago Charcot postulated
that the vibration stimulation was not unlike electric stimulation and showed similar
results [21]. In this paper the review of specific mechanisms activated by vibration will
be restricted to studies using various sonic and mechanical vibratory means from general
body vibration to focused points of vibration delivered with pencil-like probes. However,
a future more extensive review of the mechanisms activated by pulsed stimulation might
include electrical and pulsed ultrasound stimulation as well.
A final question is whether whole body vibration (WBV) is fundamentally different
from vibroacoustic therapy (VAT) and, therefore, WBV studies cannot be mixed with VAT in
the examination of mechanisms. First, although many applications of WBV use frequencies
in the level of infrasound (1ŌĆō15 Hz) they also use higher frequencies (e.g., 20ŌĆō40 Hz) in
the same range that VAT frequently uses. Music stimulation and VAT can employ pulsed
sound units at 1ŌĆō15 Hz and, in fact, ŌĆ£rhythmŌĆØ in music is primarily in that frequency. So,
there is no set frequency that makes it one or the other. Secondly, the axis of the applied
vibration may be a discriminator between approaches (e.g., vertical (axial), horizontal,
or multidirectional) but at the mechanism level there does not appear to be strict differentiation. For example, with blood flow slow axial (direction of the spine) WBV creates
pulsatile stress on endothelial cells and so enhances blood flow at 1 or 2 Hz [33] but also
with sound stimulation at 50 Hz [34]. Rhythmic driving of oscillatory coherence happens
with rhythmic pulses at 1 or 2 Hz (delta entrainment, e.g., RAS effects) and at 10 Hz (alpha),
20 Hz beta, or 40 Hz gamma, etc. Consequently, at the level of the mechanism, WBV and
VAT will be considered within the same domain of pulsed stimulation.
1.4. Methodology and Scope
1.4.1. Narrative Review Approach
In the next section we will present a narrative review of research literature that tries
to map the basic ŌĆ£lay of the landŌĆØ of vibration stimulated mechanisms and what health
conditions may be affected. This is not a systematic critical review of research methodology,
but rather a ŌĆ£cataloguingŌĆØ effort to describe applications of vibration and mechanisms
of effect. This effort was motivated by the perception that this has not been done to date.
Researchers working on the mechanisms of vibration effect have essentially worked in
silos. We determined to look for commonalities among the silos by looking not at the
vibratory device, frequency, or context of application, but rather at mechanisms involved.
Consequently, our search for studies to include was an emergent process from general to
specific with the intent to identify categories of mechanism and then the specifics within
the categories. We used a basic strategy to locate candidate studies: an electronic database
search including PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar. Initial searches included terms
such as ŌĆ£Vibration and HealthŌĆØ, ŌĆ£Vibration mechanismŌĆØ, and ŌĆ£Vibration treatmentsŌĆØ from
years 1975 to 2021. We filtered based on number of citations and considered the more
cited work first. After an initial collection of literature and, as researchers starting with the
greatest awareness of VAT where the 1996 FDA claims for blood circulation, pain reduction
(neurological), and mobility (musculoskeletal) effects were established, we decided to
focus on three central concepts of vibration mechanisms for further searches: the effects
of vibration on the blood, the nerves/brain, and bone/muscle. A further refined search
included terms like ŌĆ£vibration and blood mechanismŌĆØ, ŌĆ£vibration and neuron mechanismŌĆØ,
ŌĆ£vibration and brainŌĆØ, ŌĆ£vibration and bone/muscle mechanismŌĆØ, etc., followed by specific

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

6 of 35

mechanism like endothelial stimulation or mechanoreceptor response. The identification
and selection of papers was driven primarily by an attempt to describe the ŌĆ£fieldŌĆØ, the ŌĆ£lay
of the landŌĆØ of vibration research. Further, our focus was closely held to mechanism and
not evidence-based clinical research related to vibration without attention to mechanism.
Papers were chosen based on whether we believed them to add to our understanding of
the effects of vibration on health via those areas.
1.4.2. Mechanisms of Response to Vibration
The auditory and vibrotactile stimulation from low frequency sound shows effects that
are essentially the result of two categories of mechanisms: (1) physical, through muscular
and cellular means, and (2) neurological, through sensory-based stimulation of nerves and
receptors. At the physical level sound vibration is sensed by tactile receptors in the outer
skin (Merkel disksŌĆösensing vibratory strength and responding most to 5ŌĆō15 Hz), inner
skin (Meisner corpusclesŌĆösensing vibratory frequency and responding most to 20ŌĆō50 Hz),
and in deeper tissues (Pacinian corpusclesŌĆösensing acceleration and responding most to
60ŌĆō400 Hz) [35,36]. To avoid numbing of these sensors, VAT is usually constantly varied in
amplitude (power pulsation) and/or frequency (scanning). A physical therapeutic effect
can be obtained at a cellular and lymphatic level due to increased fluid and cellular waste
transport, increased cellular metabolism [37,38], increased blood circulation, and muscular
relaxation due to a resonance response. Within the brain, vibration hypothetically enhances
flow of cerebrospinal fluid and speeds removal of metabolic waste [39]. Most research with
VAT has not explored neural oscillatory effects but recent studies show [40ŌĆō44] potential
brain effects, especially through prolonged application of a single frequency (e.g., 40 Hz).
In 1996 the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) reviewed the Next Wave Physioacoustic Chair designed for medical purposes with six imbedded subwoofer speakers used
to apply low frequency sound vibration to the body from knees to shoulders at frequencies from 20 to 130 Hz. The FDA approved three claims for the treatment at the time
called physioacoustic therapy [28]: (1) increased blood circulation, (2) decreased pain, and
(3) increased mobility. Although no evidence was provided at the time for mechanisms of
action, the three areas generally pointed to hemodynamic effects, to neurological effects,
and to musculoskeletal effects. This FDA approval is important and noteworthy because it
appears to be the earliest vibration device approved for multiple claims. Although whole
body vibration (WBV) devices have been used for many years with the intent of developing
bone and muscle strength, FDA approval was not granted [45]. More recently specific
limited application devices using vibration have been cleared for sale [46,47]. However,
the effects claimed for WBV and the recent devices fit into the original categories of claim
from 1996. Further the general broad categories for the claims for physioacoustic therapy
encompass the vast majority of mechanisms we discovered in the literature. The exceptions
were primarily in the effects of mechanical shaking related to phlegm and mucous [48] or
orthodontics [49].
1.5. Organization of the Analysis of Mechanisms
In the following three sections we explicate three primary categories of mechanisms
activated by vibration applied to the body: hemodynamic, neurological, and musculoskeletal. By using the concept of mechanism established by Craver and Bechtel [5] we consider
the causal and organizational dimensions to identify what we call basic mechanisms and
submechanisms. This is a utilitarian simplification to focus, what is in most cases a complex
system, on the organizational sequence. For example, vibration results in stimulation of
endothelial cells (basic or first step mechanism), which then in turn releases nitric oxide
and adrenomedullin, which have different effects and so are designated submechanisms.
As we have stated earlier, this will not be an exhaustive and definitive description of
complex chains of mechanistic actions. Rather we are setting out to point to directions
for further research investigations of the effects of vibration on the body. In addition to
identifying basic causal mechanisms, we describe some health related applications. Not

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

7 of 35

every mechanism described in research has clear clinical applications. This is a nascent
field where much more research is required and where knowledge translation into clinical
application is needed.
2. Hemodynamic Effects
2.1. Basic Mechanism: Stimulation of Endothelial Cells
2.1.1. Submechanism: Nitric Oxide
One of the effects of vibration applied to the body acknowledged by the FDA in 1996
was an increase in blood circulation [28]. The question is by what mechanism does vibration
affect blood flow. A crucial signaling molecule that has a pivotal role in regulating blood
flow and oxygenation of tissues is nitric oxide (NO). Nitric oxide is produced and released
into the blood by the endothelial cells that line the blood vessels and lymphatic vessels.
Vibration stimulates the endothelial cells to produce and release NO in several forms of
which the isoform endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) is of particular importance
for the generation of NO from endothelial cells. Although the detailed mechanisms
of how sound affects the mechanosensors in the endothelium to control eNOS is not
yet completely understood, it appears that the endothelial cells mechanosensor-proteins,
Syndecan-4 (Syn4) vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and Kr├╝ppel-like Factor 2
(KLF2) translate the physical force from the vibration into biochemical signals. Studies have
shown that vibroacoustic stimulation can induce Syn4 and VEGF [50,51]. NO regulates
blood flow and vascular tone by affecting the vascular smooth muscle with the activation
of the enzyme guanylate cyclase (sGC) [52] and the phosphorylation of extracellular signalregulated kinase (ERK1/2) [53]. Although the purpose of stimulation, mode of vibration
delivery, and frequency of vibration varies, endothelial cell stimulation releases NO and
induces blood flow. The effect has been observed with whole body periodic acceleration
using a platform (pGz) at 2 Hz [54], with microcirculation in the skin at 47 Hz [55], externally
applied vibration to the arm at 50 Hz [34], sonic vibration applied to the chest at 100 Hz [56],
and at various body surfaces at 150ŌĆō250 Hz [57].
Application: General Blood Flow
Since vibrational stimulation induces blood flow, this may find general application to
conditions resulting in decreased blood flow like diabetes. Maloney-Hinds [34] used 50 Hz
vibrational stimuli for five minutes on participantsŌĆÖ forearms and found NO production
increased by 374% in the healthy controls and by 236% in the diabetes group. Skin blood
flow was significantly increased (p = 0.0001) in both groups. Johnson et al. [58] studied
diabetes patients with whole body vibration at 26 Hz and also found significant increase
(p = 0.01) in skin blood flow but with less effect than Maloney-Hinds using direct to
skin vibration.
Application: Cardio Protection and Therapy
An approach to stimulation of endothelial cells is ŌĆ£periodic accelerationŌĆØ (pGz) consisting of repetitively moving the body in a head-to-foot direction at a typical rate between
1ŌĆō3 Hz resulting in an increase in ŌĆ£pulsatile shear stressŌĆØ on the endotheliumŌĆöthe friction
of the blood against the endothelial lining of blood vessels resulting from the ŌĆ£pulseŌĆØ of the
movement and the gravitational force on the blood. This ŌĆ£shear stressŌĆØ of the blood against
the lining stimulates the release of NO and other endothelial-derived cytoprotective factors.
One application of pGz is as a form of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) where the
body is moved head to foot at a rate similar to standard compression CPR. Adams et al. [59],
in an animal study, found pGz as effective as standard CPR in terms of resuscitation survival
rate and other acute outcomes but with fewer rib fractures.
An animal study by Adams et al. [60] applied pGz at 3 Hz for 30 min after induced
cardiac arrest and resuscitation. The animals receiving the pGz treatment had a smaller
reduction in the function of heart contraction (myocardial stunning), greater flow of blood
to the heart, kidneys, stomach, and brain, showed less of an increase in Troponin I, a

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

8 of 35

protein released into the blood stream indicating damage to the heart muscles, and a
greater increase in eNOS.
The previous two studies by Adams et al. [61] used endothelial stimulation as a postcardiac arrest treatment. Does it also offer preventative protection? They examined this
by studying the occurrence of tissue damage caused by a return of oxygen rich blood following a period of oxygen deprivation (ischemia-reperfusion injury) caused by ventricular
fibrillation (VF). Animal subjects were given one hour of pGz stimulation at 3 Hz prior
to the induced VF. The animals receiving the stimulation had fewer arrhythmias of the
blood circulation pulse, less myocardial stunning, stronger regional blood flow to organs of
the body, and less indication of heart damage (Troponin I). Tests showed that the animals
receiving the pulsed stimulation at 3 Hz had higher levels of endothelial nitric oxide with
the conclusion that elevation of eNOS may have a cardioprotective function.
The studies by Adams reported above focus on heart function and effects where blood
volume is constant. Bassuk et al. [62] looked at the effect of one hour of pulsed stimulation
(pGz at 3 Hz) before and during significant blood loss from hemorrhage. The results
showed significantly less oxygen consumption in the treatment group at all points of the
hemorrhage and, after 40 mL/kg of blood loss, better preservation of regional blood flow
to stomach, ileum, kidneys, heart, and brain. The authors attribute this effect to the shear
stress produced by the motion on the endothelium and the release of nitric oxide.
Application: Neuroprotection and Neurotherapy
Aerobic exercise and the pulsed stimulation of whole body periodic acceleration
(WBPA), also known as pGz, both have been shown to have positive cardiovascular effects
through activation of nitric oxide (NO). In addition, the NO effect is known to induce the
brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)
thereby contributing a neuroprotective (prior to damaging events) and neurotherapeutic
effect (following damaging events). A study by Adams et al. [33] showed that aerobic
exercise significantly increases blood flow to the skeletal and heart muscles but not to
the brain while WBPA increase blood flow with BDNF and GDNF to the brain and the
heart but not to the muscles. They concluded that rhythmically pulsed stimulation of the
endothelium can be a non-invasive strategy for neuroprotection and neurotherapy.
In a more detailed examination of the effects of WBPA on the brains of mdx mice,
Lopez et al. [63] found an overload of calcium and sodium ions and an overproduction
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the neurons resulting in cognitive dysfunction. After
WBPA for one hour per day for eight days at 8 Hz, results showed that the elevation of
calcium and sodium ions and the overproduction of ROS had been mollified along with
an increase in enzymes that protect cells. This study again demonstrated the efficacy of
pulsed stimulation of the endothelium to release nitric oxide and a cascade of factors that
result in neuroprotection and neurotherapy.
2.1.2. Submechanism: Adrenomedullin
In addition to the release of nitric oxide, the vibratory stimulation of endothelial
cells has been shown to release the cell protecting mediator, adrenomedullin (AM). It
may function as a hormone in controlling circulation and vasodilation but also serves to
stimulate angiogenesisŌĆöthe growth of new blood vesselsŌĆöand combats oxidative stress
in cells. In this way AM can have a positive effect in cardiovascular disease including
hypertension, myocardial infarction, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. However,
in its function to extend blood supply in cells it may be a negative factor in relation to cancer.
Mart├Łnez et al. [64] conducted an animal study to examine the effect of one hour of pGz
stimulation on AM and found that immediately after the stimulation blood pressure was
significantly reduced (from 115 ┬▒ 10 to 90 ┬▒ 8) and AM level was significantly increased
and remained so for 3 h (from 776 ┬▒ 176 pg/mL baseline to 1584 ┬▒ 160 pg/mL, p < 0.01).

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

9 of 35

2.1.3. Submechanism: Antioxidants
Many disease conditions are linked to oxidative stress. These include cancer, AlzheimerŌĆÖs
and ParkinsonŌĆÖs disease, diabetes, and cardiovascular conditions like high blood pressure,
atherosclerosis, and stroke. Release of nitric oxide into circulation is known to have some
antioxidant properties. Uryash et al. [65], in a study with mice with high oxidative stress,
specifically looked for the effect of pGz on eNOS and antioxidants. The subjects were given
pGz for an hour a day and tissue was tested after one, two, and four weeks. The pulsed stimulation resulted in significant expression of antioxidants including glutathioneperoxidase-1
(GPX-1), catalase (CAT), superoxide, and superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1). It also decreased
reactive oxygen species (ROS).
2.2. Basic Mechanism: Vibropercussion
One of the features of vibration is that it results in one material striking against
anotherŌĆöwhether molecule to molecule or cell to cell or bone to bone, etc. The essentially
mechanical action can produce health-related effects.
Application: Blood Clot Dissolution
To study the effect of mechanically pulsating a blood clot Hoffman and Gill [66]
conducted an in-vitro study (outside the body) placing a one-hour-old blood clot into a
solution of the medication Heparin typically used as a blood thinner to treat heart attacks
or angina. The vessel holding the blood clot was then vibrated at 50 Hz for 20 min with a
very low amplitude to simulate the amount of vibration that might be transferred into the
body from a surface vibration. The result showed significantly better clot dissolution with
vibration (25%) versus no vibration (5%). Hoffman and Gill [67] then basically replicated
the study but applying the vibration externally through a 4 cm slab of meat as simulation
of human body structure and varying the vibration to 50 Hz applied in short bursts of one
per second. In addition to Heparin, they did a sample with Streptokinase, a medication
specifically designed to break down clots. They again found the vibration very significantly
increased clot dissolution, and with greater effect in the Streptokinase group attributed to
enhanced mixing and penetration (or in a sense ŌĆ£drug deliveryŌĆØ) of the lytic agent, which
was originally disposed from the clot.
One context where vibration is associated with stroke treatment is the ŌĆ£drip and shipŌĆØ
situation where a patient is started on a drip of recombinant tissue-type plasminogen
activator (rtPA) and then transported to a hospital in a helicopter. The helicopter typically
presents an unavoidable vibration in the range of 0.5ŌĆō120 Hz. Researchers [68,69] have
been concerned that the vibrating transport might have a negative effect on outcomes
and so studied the effects finding that there is no negative effect. However, they did not
consider that there might be a positive outcome and did not record the dominant vibration
frequencies or control for them. Most recently Dhanesha et al. [70] did consider the
possibility of a positive effect and noted vibration frequency, used a ground-based vibration
simulation arm in the study along with the no vibration control and the actual helicopter
flight. They found that the animals receiving the rtPA and the simulated vibration had
significantly smaller infarctions (areas of tissue death from a blood clot) and increased
positive neurological outcomes (86% vs. 28%). Oddly, the actual helicopter flight group
did not have significantly positive outcomes which the researchers speculate could be due
to the 20ŌĆō30 Hz band of vibration was attenuated in this helicopter flight. Dhanesha et al.
concluded that low frequency vibration is synergistic with rtPA and that application of
vibration might be a safe and simple intervention for stroke.
3. Neurological Effects
Effects of sound vibration stimulation on the neurological system are many and wideranging with multiple complex mechanisms involved. Most of these mechanisms are not
yet fully understood but we will point to how the mechanisms at a cellular level seem to
function and are related to sound vibration.

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

10 of 35

3.1. Basic Mechanism: Protein Kinases Activation
One of the questions of neuroscience is whether there is a way to regenerate or repair
neural damage from neurodegeneration, stroke, transected nerve ends, etc. Electrical stimulation [71] is one intervention that has shown some success in creating axonal regeneration
and neurite outgrowth. Low frequency sound vibration also appears to have potential at
stimulating neurite outgrowth and neuronal differentiation.
Koike et al. [72], motivated by the intent to find why music therapy might be useful
for AlzheimerŌĆÖs disease (AD) patients, conducted a study to determine if vibratory sounds
might enhance neurite outgrowth. They focused on an in-vitro examination of PC12m3 cells
known to be sensitive to nerve growth factor (NGF) that induces differentiation of nerve
cells and neurite extension. They looked specifically at the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) activity that has been shown by research with electrical stimulation [71]
to be a pathway to enhancing PC12m3 cell growth, and which also appears enhanced
in AD. They found that vibratory sound in the 10ŌĆō100 Hz range had a positive effect on
neurite growth with the strongest effect being at 40 Hz whereas vibratory sound at 150 Hz
and 200 Hz had little effect. They found that 40 Hz stimulation enhanced p38 MAPK
activity indicating that the neural outgrowth they observed was induced through the p38
MAPK pathway.
Cho et al. [73] and Kim et al. [74] examined the effect of 40 Hz sonic vibration on cell
differentiation of human umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSCs).
hUC-MSCs can differentiate into various types including neurons. Cho et al. applied
vibration to the cells continuously for 5 days; Kim et al. for 3 or 5 days. Cho determined
the differentiated cells were neuron-related oligodendrocytes because they expressed
microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP-2), which is a marker of synapse plasticity, glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) thought to maintain astrocyte structure, and myelin basic
protein (MBP) a component of myelin structure. Cho determined that the mechanism
mediating the effect of vibration on the UC-MSCs was the extracellular-signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) pathway. Kim et al. similarly examined protein expression related to neural
differentiation stimulated by the 40 Hz vibration. They found that the protein calponin 3
(CNN3) promoted functional neural differentiation.
Choi et al. [75] examined the effect of multiple frequencies of low frequency vibration
on adipose tissue-derived stem cells (AT-MSCs). Adipose tissue is commonly referred to
as body fat and AT-MSCs are among the most studied in recent research. Choi applied
vibration to the AT-MSCs for four days at 10, 20, 30, and 40 Hz with specific focus on
the mechanism of ERK. They found that 30 Hz was most effective at affecting neural
differentiation of these specific stem cells.
3.2. Basic Mechanism: Nerve Stimulation
Evidenced-based research repeatedly shows positive clinical effects from the application of pulsed stimulation of the body. This applies in varied neurological conditions
including cerebral palsy [76], multiple sclerosis [77], and chronic musculoskeletal pain [78].
The question is whether this results in some way from a stimulation of the nervous system
and if so, how does that occur. How pervasive is a system to respond to vibration? In
the living body transmission of sensory information depends on sensory neurons and
mechanosensation at axonal terminals in peripheral nerves. Different types of sensing neurons include mechanosensors detecting external signals, proprioceptors receiving internal
body signals, and many types of nociceptors that detect noxious body-threatening stimuli.
Usoskina et al. [79] examined the molecular mechanisms activated in the process of cells
detecting vibration. By observing calcium ion transients in the somata of neurons, they saw
that neurons reliably detected every individual stimulus (e.g., each molecular compression
in a sound wave) and then converted these into specific firing patterns in the nerves. Given
this basic mechanism, we next look at several categories in which this is applied.

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

11 of 35

3.2.1. Submechanism: Sensitization of the Proprioception System
The bodyŌĆÖs proprioception system gathers and processes information about changes
in the position of joints and limbs and, therefore, is strongly involved in the control of
posture and movement. Proprioceptors are mechanosensory neurons in the skin (Merkel
disks and MeissnerŌĆÖs and Pacinian corpuscles), muscles (spindles), tendons (Golgi tendon
organs), and joints. This proprioception system involving receptors, nerves, spinal cord,
and pathways of the central nervous system terminates within the thalamus and cerebral
cortex [36].
The proprioception system is very sensitive to vibration and, since it is an important
factor in motor control, the effect of vibration has been the subject of considerable research,
especially the effect of whole body vibration on the rehabilitation of neurological disorders [80]. The stimulation or sensitization of the proprioception system appears to engage
a mechanism that retrains the body-mind strategies of motor control or establishes greater
consonance between input from the senses and output to the motor system at the cortical
level [81]. Perhaps pointing to a cascade effect in this proprioceptive mechanism, which is
not fully understood, Delecluse et al. [82] propose that vibration may enhance corticospinal
cell connectivity to spinal motor neurons.
Application: Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)
Gay et al. [81] postulated that CRPS type I may be caused by a sensory inputŌĆōoutput
mismatch that leads to motor programming disorganization in cortical structures. They
hypothesized that enhancing proprioceptive feedback with vibratory stimulation would
minimize pain and increase range of motion. The study by Gay et al. [81] applied sinusoidal
vibration at 86 Hz to the hand and wrist of patients with CRPS for 20 min a day, five days a
week for 10 weeks in addition to conventional rehabilitation sessions. The control group
received only the conventional treatment. The results showed that pain severity was lower
by close to 50% and range of motion improved by about 30% in the treatment group. They
attributed this result to a reestablishment of sensory inputŌĆōoutput consonance.
Application: Cerebral Palsy
The research of Katusic et al. [80] proceeded on the premise that proprioception is
crucial to motor control and hypothesized that sound-based vibration can resonate through
the body and enhance sensation of body position, location, and orientation. Further they
accepted the premise of Delecluse et al. [82] that vibration could alter corticospinal cell and
spinal motor neuron connectivity and that this stimulation of the proprioceptive pathways
could rearrange motor control strategies resulting in better postural stability. To test this
Katusic et al. [80] did a three month study with 89 children with spastic cerebral palsy (CP)
randomized to a physiotherapy only group and to physiotherapy plus vibration group.
The vibration treatment, applied with a mat they could lie on, consisted of 40 Hz sine
waves for 20 min, two times a week for 12 weeks. The vibration treatment group improved
significantly in both spasticity and in gross motor function.
Ko et al. [83] observe that vibration has recently been shown to improve proprioception
and thereby balance and motor skills. They postulate that this may be because vibration
stimulates muscles and tendons. To test whether whole body vibration at 20ŌĆō24 Hz would
affect sense of joint position, gait, and balance in children with CP, they randomized
24 children to physical therapy (PT) or traditional PT plus vibration for 20 min (3 min on,
3 min off) two times a week for three weeks. They found significant improvement in joint
position sense and improvement in gait variables in the vibration group.
3.2.2. Submechanism: Vagal Nerve Stimulation
The vagus nerve, one of the 12 cranial nerves, serves as a major parasympathetic
(efferent) component of the autonomic nervous system and importantly transmits sensory
information from much of the body to the brain [84]. It plays a key role in cardiac and
gastrointestinal function, in muscle control of mouth and throat, in the neuroendocrine-

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

12 of 35

immune system, and in the regulation of emotion including anxiety and depression. Vagus
nerve stimulation (VNS) [84] is a recognized practice commonly done with manual massage
or compression, electrical stimulation, or vibration including with the voice or gargling
throat or with external vibrotactile devices. However, the spleen has nerve fibers that are
integrated with the vagus nerve and studies [85,86] show that anti-inflammatory effects of
the vagus nerve rely somewhat on the splenic nerve to the extent that stimulation of the
splenic nerve results in immunosuppressive effects comparable to VNS [87]. Vibration at
the abdominal level [88] may then be stimulating the splenicŌĆōvagal nerve system. Specific
applications of VNS include refractory epilepsy, depression, and decreasing inflammation.
One of the known mechanisms by which stimulation of the vagus nerve has its effect is the
release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine.
Application: Depression
Sigurdard├│ttir et al. [88] conducted a study with 38 people with depressive disorder
(18 treatment, 20 control) using relaxing music with a specifically created low frequency
sound track that activated a vibrotactile transducer at the abdominal level at the back of
the chair in which they were seated. The premised mechanism for their intended effect
was the activation of Pacinian corpuscles sending an afferent impulse in the vagus nerve to
the regions of the brain associated with depression. The vibratory stimulation treatment
was applied for 20 min in eight sessions over 3ŌĆō4 weeks. The authors did not report
what specific frequencies they employed but maintain that Pacinian corpuscles stimulated
at 240 Hz have a maximal afferent output but afferent output occurs at any frequency
below that. Although not a rigorously controlled study and not measuring changes in
the vagal tone, the pilot study did find a reduction in depression scores in the treatment
group and attributes this to stimulation of the vagus nerve and the central nervous system
through the abdomen. A study by Braun Janzen et al. [89] that applied a very similar
treatment also found a reduction in depression and anhedonia although it did not premise
vagal stimulation.
Application: RettŌĆÖs Syndrome
RettŌĆÖs syndrome (RS) is a gene mutation-based neurological disorder mainly affecting
females that involves brain stem immaturity [90] resulting in dysfunction of the autonomic
nervous system. The resultant symptoms are numerous with many associations to the
vagus nerve. These include breathing and cardiac function, speech and hearing-related
communication, and movement control and seizures [91,92]. Vagus nerve stimulation
has shown positive results in reducing epileptic seizures [91] and along with auditory
stimulation has been effective in increasing cortical strength and auditory function [92].
Bergstr├Čm-Isacsson et al. [93] examined neurophysiological brainstem data and emotional response in 29 RettŌĆÖs participants and 11 controls to six stimuli with music and low
frequency vibration at 40 Hz. Each stimulus was presented for 10 min in a repeated measures design. Outcome measures used were mean arterial blood pressure, the coefficient
of variation of mean arterial blood pressure, cardiac sensitivity to baroreflex, and cardiac
vagal tone (CVT). Results showed that the strongest parasympathetic response in the RettŌĆÖs
group was to the 40 Hz vibratory stimulation and with a significant increase in CVT.
3.3. Category of Neurological EffectsŌĆöPain and Vibratory Analgesia Specific
The pain-reducing effect of vibration is demonstrated in numerous evidence-based
research studies [78,94ŌĆō97]. Mechanical and acoustic vibrations have been used extensively
to address pain and is a treatment technique in orthopedics and low back pain [98,99],
physiotherapy [100ŌĆō102], during cosmetic procedures [103], and during orthodontic work
and orofacial pain [104ŌĆō107]. However, until relatively recently, very little was thoroughly
described and understood about pain perception mechanisms. Studies with electrophysiology have shown cortical neurons responding to noxious stimuli, but it has not become

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

13 of 35

clear to what extent this response represents pain or correlates with it [108]. Consequently,
the mechanisms by which vibration acts as an analgesic is less understood.
3.3.1. Basic Mechanism: Gate Control
One of the submechanisms of the general mechanism of nerve stimulation but a
basic mechanism of analgesia is focused on the function of the substantia gelatinosa
in the dorsal horn and is commonly known as gate control. The theory for this pain
mechanism was proposed by Melzack and Wall [109] and postulates that the substantia
gelatinosa modulates sensory information being transmitted to the spinal cord and the
brain. Specifically, signals from pain receptors are carried to the dorsal horn by small
diameter afferent A-delta and C fibers. The signal transmission from the pain receptors
can be modulated (inhibited) by the large afferent A-alpha and A-beta fibers transmitting
sensory signals from skin sensation such as touch or vibration [78,96,109]. This mechanism
known as gate control theory has been subject of considerable criticism and aspects have
been questioned [110,111] and enhanced by MelzackŌĆÖs neuromatrix of pain theory [112]
but its fundamental function remains.
Salter and Henry [113] specifically explored the response of wide dynamic range
(WDR) spinal neurons in the lumbar dorsal horn to vibration at different amplitudes and
frequencies to determine how they might play a role in analgesic effects. They tried a variety
of frequencies and intensities and found that WDR neurons entrained to the vibratory
frequencies below 80 Hz. Their findings suggest that pain reduction is accomplished by
the effect of vibration on Pacinian corpuscle afferents and the WDR neuron response in the
dorsal horn but that frequency, location, and intensity of the vibratory stimulus is a factor
that needs further clarification.
3.3.2. Basic Mechanism: Modulating Autonomic ResponsesŌĆöPain and Beyond
An alternative medical practice that has growing scientific evidence for its effect
on the central nervous system and regulating autonomic responses is acupuncture [114].
The clinical efficacy of acupuncture may reside in its neurobiological foundations and in
its purported effect of creating biochemical changes in the body and brain that control
the autonomic nervous systemŌĆÖs functions such as blood pressure, heart rate variability,
skin temperature, and perception of pain. The detailed explanation of mechanisms is
still needed.
One question that arises in relation to acupuncture is whether the specific acupoints
must be punctured with needles or whether vibratory sound stimulation might have the
same effect. Xu et al. [115] explored this question by looking for microcirculation using laser
Doppler flowmetry at meridian acupoints while stimulating the points with low frequency
sound waves between 16 and 160 Hz. They found different points respond optimally
to different sound frequencies. For example, the point Yin Ling Quan: A0 responded to
29.14 Hz, Zusanli A1 responded best to 58.27 Hz, and Tianjing A2 to 110.00 Hz. Br─ātil─ā and
Moldovan [116] used an electrical input output model to determine optimal frequencies
for the lung meridian (124 Hz) and kidney meridian (120 Hz). Weber et al. [117] explored
the use of a simultaneous sound combination (32, 48, and 64 Hz) for its effectiveness to
reduce perceived pain intensity and pain threshold compared to a single frequency sound
stimulation and a sham. They applied electromagnetic transducers to five acupoints indicated for relief of pain and anxiety and subjected 13 pain-free participants to a cold pressor
test. Results showed that both multifrequency and single frequency sound stimulation
significantly improved pain tolerance and reduce intensity of pain.
3.3.3. Basic Mechanism: NeurotransmittersŌĆöPain and Beyond
Unpacking the complexity of the role of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators on the
body and brain is beyond the scope of this paper. However, research has shown instances in
which neurotransmitters are stimulated by vibration and these will be described here.

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

14 of 35

In relation to vibratory analgesia, Salter and Henry [118] examined specifically the
vibratory activation of P1 -purinergic receptors in the dorsal horn by the neurotransmitter
adenosine. In a study with cats, vibration was applied at 80 Hz in 2.5ŌĆō3.5 s trains every
20ŌĆō25 s for 10 min. This resulted in a vibration-induced depression of lower lumbar
nociceptive neurons and remained in effect for up to 4 h after the stimulation. Various
agents used to attenuate the depression of these neurons revealed that adenosine was
responsible for the analgesic effect. The study suggests that the effect earlier described as
gate control may be mediated by the release of adenosine resulting from vibration.
Several neurotransmitters not specifically related to pain have already been discussed
in other contexts above. Assuming vibration can stimulate the vagus nerve and the related
splenic nerve as discussed above, vibration then has the effect of releasing acetylcholine,
which plays a key role in synapses and especially at the location where nerves and muscles
connect. It also plays a role in controlling the autonomic nervous system and a particularly
important role in the cognitive system and in regulating heart rate. Additionally, stimulation of the splenic nerve causes the induction of norepinephrine. Nitric oxide, extensively
discussed above, is also a neurotransmitter serving to regulate and mediate processes of
the nervous, immune, and cognitive systems.
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is a prominent neurotransmitter in the brain and
the central nervous system. It plays a crucial role reducing the activity of neurons and
especially in control of fear and anxiety. Safarov and Kerimov [119,120] in two separate
animal studies explored the effect of low frequency vibration (20 Hz) on GABA levels
and its metabolism. The found that vibration, regardless of duration, increased GABA
level in the brain stem, the large hemispheres, and the cerebellum as well as activity of the
glutamate decarboxylase enzyme, which produces GABA. However, they found the effect
more marked with 30 min stimulation than with long periods like 7 h. The implication is
that one of the mechanisms creating the relaxation effect of vibroacoustic stimulation may
be the boost in neurotransmitter GABA.
3.4. Basic Mechanism: Oscillatory Coherence Supports Connectivity and Circuit Function
The neurological effect from rhythmically pulsed sensory stimulation is premised
on two important postulates: (1) that rhythmic sensory stimulation (RSS) drives a neural
response resulting in increased oscillatory coherence and (2) that oscillatory coherence is
crucially linked to connectivity, circuit function, and related to health conditions.
As to the postulation that RSS drives a neural response, recent research in somatosensory, auditory, and visual modalities shows that vibrotactile rhythmically pulsed stimulation has a strong neural driving effect [121ŌĆō123]. For example, vibratory stimulation of
a finger, the hand, or the median nerve results in an oscillatory response in primary and
secondary sensorimotor cortices [124ŌĆō126] and attention plays almost no role [127]. More
auditory rhythmic stimulation research has been done to elicit steady-state or spontaneous
oscillatory responses using clicks, amplitude-modulated isochronous sounds [128], or pure
tones. Examples include a 40 Hz amplitude modulated tone [129,130], or even the rhythms
of binaural beats that are created through binaurally detuned tones [131]. What follows
then is the conclusion that RSS can drive oscillatory coherence.
The assertion that oscillatory coherence is linked to circuit function and related to
health conditions is more crucial but less understood. Deep brain stimulation (DBS)
research suggests that circuit dysfunction is common to many psychiatric and neurological
conditions [132,133]. Basically, the dysregulation of circuits that underlies these conditions
stems from a lack of excitation-based coherence, disturbed coherence, or coherence that
is overly strong in inappropriate neural populations. Llinas pointed specifically to the
recurrent connections between the thalamus and the cortex that have a mechanism function
to connect areas of the cortex and control information flow [133ŌĆō137]. These thalamocortical
loops serve communication in the brain similar to what an internet hub does. Llinas
further maintained that thalamocortical interconnectivity depends primarily on rhythmic
oscillatory activity. Thalamocortical loops function optimally with rhythmic oscillatory

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

15 of 35

activity in the cortex in the gamma band (40 Hz) and in the thalamus in the alpha band
(10 Hz). Thalamocortical dysrhythmia (TCD) is characterized by a decrease in alpha band
activity (power) with a related increase in theta band activity (4ŌĆō7 Hz) and a reduction
in cortically consistent gamma band activity. TCD appears related to neurological and
psychiatric conditions; specifically cognitive, motor, auditory, and mood functions. TCD is
linked to conditions including ParkinsonŌĆÖs disease, major depression, neurogenic central
pain, tinnitus, and schizophrenia [134].
Assuming then that vibratory stimulation (RSS) can drive oscillatory coherence and
potentially regulate dysrhythmic circuits in the brain, RSS may employ the mechanism of
oscillatory coherence and positively affect the health conditions resulting to some extent
from these dysrhythmias. The positive response of major depression to RSS may be an
indicator of this [89]. The mechanism of driving oscillatory coherence with RSS broadens
the focus from the neuroscience of circuit connections (the connectome) to the framework
of dynamic brain rhythms related to neural spiking activity (the dynome) [13].
3.4.1. Application: Neurogenic Pain
Some mechanism for vibratory analgesia were explained above under gate control.
However, there is pain that does not appear to stem from nociception and where the
application of vibratory stimulation cannot be affecting only the dorsal horn neurons
because the frequency is above the primary response level of Pacinian corpuscles and the
rapidly adapting mechanoreception system. Such pain may then be neurogenic, stemming
from neural circuit dysrhythmias or disconnections. Hollins et al. [97] explores this and
determines that in some cases the vibratory analgesia must stem from cortical dynamics
and specifically from an interaction of Brodmann areas 3a and 3b/1. Fallon et al. [138]
observed that in Fibromyalgia (FM) patients there was increased theta power in the prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices consistent with TCD characteristics. This increased
frontal theta activity was significantly correlated measured tenderness and tiredness scores.
Jensen et al. [139] used brain imaging to examine brain connectivity in FM patients and
found less connectivity between the rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC) (known to
play a role in inhibiting pain) and the hippocampus extending into the part of the brain
stem known to modulate pain.
In this context where FM seems to be related to brain dysregulation and connectivity,
where pain appears to be related to brain region interaction, and where there is demonstrated potential for vibration to drive neural coherence, it can be speculated that the
positive results from vibratory stimulation on FM patients were due to the mechanism of
oscillatory coherence [30,140]. Both studies [30,140] used 40 Hz vibrotactile stimulation of
the body, used oscillatory coherence and its relation to connectivity as a premise for effect,
but did not establish mechanism with brain imaging. The authors are currently engaged in
a study to explore this mechanism.
3.4.2. Application: Neurodegenerative Conditions
The specific mechanisms or causes related to neurodegenerative diseases and conditions
are not fully understood but one path being explored with some success is that of spontaneous
brain oscillation power, synchronization, dysrhythmia, and circuit connectivity.
Dockstader et al. [141] studied the oscillatory power in various frequency bands in
brain regions using magnetoencephalography (MEG) imaging in children who had been
treated for brain tumors with cranial radiation therapy (CRT). Children treated with CRT
consistently are found to have cognitive deficits in attention, processing speed, and memory.
The results showed a clear pattern of gamma deficits with a significantly lower gamma
oscillation power in the 60ŌĆō100 Hz range in the resting state.
Stam et al. [142] studied AlzheimerŌĆÖs patients (AD) and healthy controls with full-head
MEG with the purpose of investigating linear and non-linear interdependencies in the
MEG signal channels. Results showed that this measure of synchronization was lower
in AD in the 10ŌĆō14 Hz alpha band, 18ŌĆō22 Hz beta band, and in the 22ŌĆō40 Hz gamma

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

16 of 35

band. Additionally, studying AD patients with MEG, Ribary et al. [136] looked at 40 Hz
oscillatory coherence at cortical and subcortical sites associated with the thalamocortical
loop. Results showed that although AD patients had similar activity patterns as healthy
patients, the AD patients had reduced gamma activity in the cortical component.
Recent research [42,43,143ŌĆō145] demonstrated that 40Hz auditory, vibrotactile, or visual rhythmic sensory stimulation (RSS) had significantly positive results on AD symptoms.
Although none of these studies confirmed the effect on oscillatory coherence in humans,
that mechanism can be inferred from the method and results. A possible submechanism
of RSS driving oscillatory coherence at 40 Hz was shown by Iaccarino [42]. They demonstrated that in AD mice the effect of the general 40 Hz RSS was to drive fast-spiking
parvalbumin-positive-interneurons (at 40 Hz but not at other frequencies) and as a result
reducing amyloid-╬▓ levels. They also observed a reduction in inflammation, increase in
microglia activity, blood vessel lumen size, and cognitive performance.
Lozano and Lipsman [132] review and explain dysfunctional brain circuits and specifically how deep brain stimulation (DBS) can mitigate the effect, for example, of the motor
circuit affecting ParkinsonŌĆÖs disease (PD). The role of DBS in relation to the dysfunctional
motor circuit in PD is the inhibition of a group of neurons with 130 Hz electrical stimulation.
While the widely accepted approach of DBS is an inhibitory one, Neuman et al. [146] point
out that DBS modulates the motor circuit but does not restore it functionally. They differentiate the motor circuit pathways more precisely in the basal ganglia and suggest their work
may inspire innovative ways to improve the therapeutic efficacy of neuromodulation in
PD. Several studies have used sound vibration as a neuromodulatory stimulant with PD
patients [44,147]. One study applied 30 Hz and the other 40 Hz. Both had significant positive results and, although no neuroimaging was used to verify effects on circuit function,
they pointed to the potential mechanism of vibration therapy with PD.
3.4.3. Submechanism: Frontal Oscillatory Symmetry
The discussion above has already identified a vibration mechanism related to major
depressive disorder (MDD) under vagal stimulation and under oscillatory coherence and
TCD. Decreased connectivity is a clearly identified factor in MDD [148] and so affecting
MDD by driving coherence with rhythmic sound and vibration is a possibility. There is
a further potential mechanism for MDD related to frontal asymmetry. There is considerable evidence that frontal EEG asymmetry between left and right in the alpha band is a
biomarker for depression and anxiety [149] but age, gender, and severity of depression
interaction raises a caution on this [150]. However, studies have shown that using music
stimulation with depressed participants has resulted in a reduction of frontal asymmetry
in the EEG [151ŌĆō153]. These music studies did not use low frequency sound or vibrotactile
stimulation. The only known study that has used vibrotactile gamma stimulation [89] did
show significant reduction in depression severity. More research into the occurrence of
frontal oscillatory asymmetry and vibratory stimulation is needed.
4. Musculoskeletal Effects
Effects of sound vibration stimulation on the musculoskeletal system are many and
wide-ranging with multiple complex mechanisms involved. These structures include the
muscles, skeleton, intervertebral discs, ligaments, and other associated structures. We will
point to how the mechanisms at a cellular level seem to function and are related to sound
vibration and how it translates to applications in humans.
4.1. Basic Mechanism: The Muscle Stretch Reflex
The physiological basis for vibration acting on the muscles involves the mechanical
stimulation of the muscle stretch reflex leading to neuromuscular potentiation [154]. The
reflex functions to maintain a constant muscle length so any stretches result in involuntary
muscle contractions, and so a low frequency (0ŌĆō200 Hz) paradigm of vibration can lead
to thousands of such muscle contractions within minutes of application [155]. Vibration

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

17 of 35

of the muscles causes a cascade of events: afferent neurons stimulate alpha motor neurons, leading to motor unit recruitment, increased firing frequency, and/or improved
synchronization, which leads to quicker or more forceful muscle contraction and an overall
increase in muscle fibers over time (i.e., hypertrophy) [154]. Muscle hypertrophy is correlated with an increase in protein synthesis and an addition of contractile filaments, leading
to greater muscle strength. The Akt/mTOR/p70S6K signaling pathway in muscle cells is a
crucial component in the hypertrophy process and is necessary in inhibiting the opposite
(i.e., muscle atrophy), and has been shown to be enhanced by vibration stimulation in both
mechanical loading and muscle injury contexts [156]. Several studies have shown that Akt
levels increase in response to muscle contractile activity and mechanical tension, both of
which are stimulated by vibration treatment [155,157].
Vibratory stimulation of muscle cells in vitro and in vivo also decreases the expression
of genes that prevent atrophy: namely myostatin and atrogin-1 [158,159]. Myostatin
regulates muscle growth by inhibiting myogenesis and atrogin-1 enhances proteolysis
functions. The decrease in myostatin and atrogin-1 after 30 Hz vibration treatment has
been associated with the fusion of satellite (muscle) cells [155].
The muscle hypertrophy pathway and atrophy pathway are not completely independent however, and function antagonistically to each other. For example, when Akt
is activated it phosphorylates FOXO1 and sequesters it in the cytoplasm, inhibiting its
transcriptional activity [156]. Without Akt activity, FOXO1 can induce transcription of
atrogin-1, which leads to atrophy via increased protein degradation [160,161]. Vibration
may also enhance mitochondrial biogenesis, which normally occurs as a major adaptation
of skeletal muscles in response to exercise training. One study found that vibration at
50 Hz enhanced the expression of PGC-1╬▒ in the soleus muscle, gastrocnemius muscle and
liver, and was associated with increased muscle strength [162]. PGC1╬▒ plays an important
role in mitochondrial biogenesis and is regulated by mitogen-activated protein kinase p38
(p38 MAPK) and is activated during exercise.
Application: Using Vibration to Provide Exercise Like Effects
The use of vibration as a tool to produce exercise-like effects on the muscles provides
valuables applications in the rehabilitation sciences. The most well-known use of vibration
is for promoting muscle recovery and performance in athletes [154,163,164]. However, there
are lesser known uses that are crucial for the treatment of a variety of medical conditions,
especially in situations where exercise is necessary but difficult to achieve. We shall present
three such examples to follow.
Gloeckl et al. [161] and Lage et al. [162] were able to safely and successfully use
vibration therapy as a pulmonary rehabilitation tool for patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) who require physical exercise but cannot perform due to
breathing limitations and general malaise. Although physical exercise is the basis of
pulmonary rehabilitation for people with COPD, intense exercise may also stimulates proinflammatory cytokines and can be harmful in that context [165,166]. Since the magnitude
of the exercise stimulus is related to the increase in inflammatory cytokines, treatment
for COPD needs to stimulate the muscles without such complications [167]. For this
reason, clinical studies have tested vibration therapy for COPD and found functional
improvements in mobility and an anti-inflammatory effect [168,169].
Another application has been in the use of vibration treatment for frail elderly people.
Sarcopenia is a form of muscle loss that occurs with aging and/or immobility. Strength
training can reverses age-related muscle and strength losses while promoting muscle
hypertrophy [170]. However, due to the intensity of exercise needed to achieve such a
result the appeal and application by the elderly is very restricted, with only 10ŌĆō15% of this
population reported to engage in such training [171]. Vibration treatment of the elderly
is thus a safe and effective strength training tool that has shown high compliance among
the elderly population and has shown positive results in improving in balance, physical
function, and muscle strength [172ŌĆō174].

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

18 of 35

A third condition for which vibration may be applied is for Duchenne muscular
dystrophy (DMD), which is a degenerative disorder caused by a defective gene responsible
for producing a muscular protein called dystrophin. This protein plays an important
role in preventing muscle fatigue, and patients with DMD often have poorly developed
muscles and, as a consequence, bone. Exercise is a crucial treatment for muscle and bone
growth; however, over-activity among DMD patients can result in pain, myoglobinuria,
and further fatigue in the muscles [175]. Therefore, vibration treatment can act as a useful
adjunct to exercise therapy to keep muscle fatigue low while maintaining optimal growth.
Moreira-Marconi et al. (2017) found that vibration treatment can improve or maintain
functional mobility and strength in the muscles among DMD patients [176]. In summary,
the benefits of vibration on the muscles present an important modality for treatment that
includes a low risk, high compliance form of stimulation that may benefit a wide variety of
conditions affecting the musculature.
4.2. Basic Mechanism: Determining Bone Cell Progenitor Fate
The skeleton is a very dynamic structure that is maintained by bone deposition and
resorption, determined largely by the activity of osteoblasts and osteoclasts respectively.
Structurally, bone is created of different types of cells and a rich extracellular matrix (ECM).
Osteoblasts have the ability to secrete and calcify the ECM and are derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). The osteogenic differentiation of MSCŌĆÖs involve three stages:
commitment to osteogenic lineage, matrix synthesis, and matrix mineralization [177]. The
major genetic markers for osteoblasts include RUNX2, ALP, Col-I, OSX, and OCN.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

RUNX2: a protein encoded by the RUNX2 gene that is a key transcription factor
associated with osteoblast differentiation.
ALP: alkaline phosphatase. An enzyme responsible for breaking down proteins and
is associated with bone growth.
ColŌłÆ1: collagen type 1. It is main structural protein in the extracellular matrix found
in the bodyŌĆÖs various connective tissues.
OSX: Osterix, also called transcription factor Sp7. It plays a major role in driving the differentiation of mesenchymal precursor cells into osteoblasts and eventually osteocytes.

Zhou et al. (2011) investigated the effect of vibration on the osteogenic differentiation
of MSCs seeded on human bone-derived scaffolds and found that 40 Hz vibration promoted
MSC differentiation by upregulating the mRNA and protein expression of RUNX2, ALP,
Col-I, and OCN [178]. Zhang et al. (2012) cultured periodontal ligament stem cells under
vibration and in the 40ŌĆō120 Hz range found increased levels of ALP, ColŌłÆ1, Runx2, Osx,
and OCN [179]. Additionally, Pr├© et al. treated MSCs with mechanical vibration, and the
results showed that the expression of ALP and Runx2 was significantly increased after
30 Hz mechanical vibration treatment (2017) [180]. This suggests a direct role in vibration
in influencing the stem cell fate toward osteoblast formation.
RUNX2 and OSX are usually highly expressed at the early stages where stem cells
commit to the osteogenic lineage [181,182], ColŌłÆ1 and ALP at the middle stage (matrix
synthesis) [179,182], and OCN at the late stage of osteogenesis [183]. RUNX2 and OSX are
transcription factors that are important for stem cell commitment to the osteogenic lineage
and are expressed specifically in osteoblasts. RUNX2 are active earlier and OSX at a later
step once preosteoblasts form into fully functional osteoblasts. Studies looking at molecular and genetic manipulation of RUNX2 in vivo found that its expression is necessary for
MSC differentiation towards the osteoblast lineage [184,185], and without it this process
cannot begin [186]. RUNX2 is also known to negatively regulate osteoblast proliferation by
acting on the cell-cycle [181], and prevents terminal differentiation of osteoblasts to keep
them in an immature state. This corresponded with several studies that found that the
proliferation of osteoblasts did not change or was decreased after vibration [187ŌĆō189]. OSX
is a more specific marker of osteoblasts and is expressed after RUNX2, and further guides
differentiation from preosteoblast to immature osteoblast state [182]. OSX binds to the
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), which leads to the expression of collagen type 1

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

19 of 35

and activation of the Wnt signaling pathway [190]. Chen et al. (2016) found that vibration
treatment of MSCs cultured on hydroxyapatite-coated surfaces increased in the expression
of Wnt and ╬▓-catenin in addition to RUNX2 and OSX [177]. The Wnt/╬▓-catenin signaling
pathway is a normal physiological response to mechanical loading, which enhances the
sensitivity of osteoblasts to further mechanical loading [191]. Hou et al. (2011) investigated the mechanisms of vibration-enhanced osteogenic responses in MC3T3-E1 cells
and they demonstrated that Wnt signaling was involved in the transduction of vibrations,
which caused a decrease in the RANKL/OPG ratio and levels of sclerostin [192]. The
RANKL/RANK/OPG pathway is an important signaling pathway in the formation and
activity of osteoclasts, and is one that is also influenced by vibration treatment. Osteoclasts
are derived from monocytes and macrophages, which proliferate in the bone marrow and
fuse to give rise to multinucleated osteoclasts [193]. Osteoclast progenitors express RANK
(receptor activator of nuclear factor-╬║B), which interact with the RANK-ligand (RANKL) to
initiate osteoclastogenesis. RANKL is produced by a variety of cells such as osteoblasts, osteocytes, stromal cells, and lymphocytes. Osteoprotegerin (OPG), on the other hand, binds
competitively to RANK and inhibits this process. Therefore, the availability and interaction
of RANKL/RANK/OPG determine the rate of osteoclastogenesis [194]. Therefore, the
Wnt/╬▓-catenin signaling pathway stimulated by vibration produces a dual function to
stimulate the formation of osteoblasts while inhibiting the formation of osteoclasts. In
other words, vibration stimulated an increase in bone amount and quality.
Kulkarni et al. (2013) found that mechanical vibration of osteoclast precursor cells
reduce DC-STAMP expression in the presence of RANKL in osteoclast precursor cells leading to the inhibition of osteoclast formation [195]. Wu et al. (2012) found that stimulation of
murine monocytes by vibration reduced the expression of osteoclast-specific genes such as
cathepsin K, matrix metallopeptidase-9 (MMP-9), and c-Fos to such a level that cells could
not differentiate into osteoclasts even in the presence of RANKL [196]. Kim et al. (2012) and
Sun et al. (2011) independently found that vibration stimulation of mesenchymal stromal
stem cells increased OPG expression, indicating a direct effect of vibration in inhibiting
osteoclast formation [197,198].
In summary, it seems that vibration stimulation on bone related stem cells promote
anabolic processes by stimulating the formation of osteoblasts while simultaneously inhibiting catabolic processes by inhibiting the formation of osteoclasts.
Application: Tissue Engineering
A major application of vibration in the differentiation of stem cells in the context of
bone health is in engineering bone tissue. Typically, this includes osteoblasts and other bone
cell progenitors growing and attaching to an artificial surface for eventual implantation.
The ability of MSCs to adhere to the implant surface and their differentiation on the
implant surface are important components of successful osseointegration [199,200]. In
order to analyze cell adhesion to the implant surface, Chen et al. (2016) assessed the matrix
organization and the cytoskeleton rearrangement (F-actin), and the gene expression of
F-actin, ╬▓1 integrin, vinculin, and paxillin, which are involved in the adhesion of cells
to substrates. They found that vibration of MSCs on hydroxyapatite-coated surfaces
significantly increased the expression of F-actin, and such upregulation of F-actin by
mechanical stress has also been reported in other studies [201,202]. Mechanical strain is
known to induce changes in cytoskeletal organization, and actin filaments are crucial for
cell adhesion [203]. Chen et al. (2016) also found an increase in other proteins necessary
for adhesion such as ╬▓1 integrin, vinculin, and paxillin [177]. This has been found in other
studies as well [201,204]. In summary, the differentiation of MSCs to anabolic processes
and the adhesion to surfaces after vibration allow for this to be an ideal application for
engineering bone tissue in the lab for implantation.

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

20 of 35

4.3. Basic Mechanism: Vibration Effects on Ossification and Resorption
Bone remodeling is a lifelong process where mature bone tissue is removed (i.e., bone
resorption) and replaced by new bone tissue (i.e., ossification). This process is important for
the adaptation of bone to mechanical loading and healing from microdamage and fractures.
The imbalance of bone resorption and ossification leads to disorders such as osteoporosis, a
systemic skeletal disorder characterized by the deterioration of bone tissue leading to bone
fragility and an increase in fracture risk. Bone mineral density (BMD) is a measurement
of the amount of bone mineral in bone tissue, and is used clinically to assess the risk to
osteoporosis or fracture. In this section we lay out the evidence that vibration treatment
has anabolic effects on bone remodeling, and how this translates to better bone health and
BMD when applied to humans.
Healthy bone remodeling involves maintaining a balance between bone resorption
and ossification and is maintained by a network of regulatory proteins [205]. Bone resorption is done via the action of osteoclasts that break down bone, and bone formation
(i.e., ossification) is mediated by osteoblasts, which secrete new bone material. As described
in Section 4.2, vibration stimulation has been showed to shift the balance towards bone
formation by enhancing anabolic pathways and inhibiting catabolic pathways. Osteocytes
(i.e., mature bone cells) are the major mechanosensor in bone that influence osteoblast and
osteoclast activities when subjected to a variety of mechanical stimuli, including fluid flow,
hydrostatic pressure, and mechanical stretching [206].
Animal models have shown that vibration at 10ŌĆō100 Hz can stimulate bone growth
by doubling bone formation rates and inhibiting osteoporosis [207]. Bacabac et al. (2006)
specifically tested the effects of vibration on osteoblast precursor cells at a variety of
frequencies from 5 to 100 Hz. They found that nitric oxide (NO) release and COX-2 mRNA
expression were positively correlated with frequency whereas prostaglandin E2 release
negatively correlated with frequency [208]. It has been shown in vitro that osteoclasts
migrate away from NO [208,209], and PGE2 I stimulates osteoclasts differentiation and
activity by increasing mRNA levels of osteoclast differentiation factors. Therefore, the anticorrelation of NO and PGE2 has a net effect of stimulating ossification over bone resorption.
Da Jing et al. (2016) tested vibration at 45 Hz and 0.5 g in leptin deficient mice, which
exhibit decreased bone mass and impaired bone microstructure. They found that vibration treatment in these rats stimulate tibial alkalinephosphatase (ALP), OCN, runt-related
transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), type I collagen (COL1), BMP2, Wnt3a, Lrp6, and b-catenin
mRNA expression, and prevented the increases of tibial sclerostin (SOST), RANK, RANKL,
and RANL/osteoprotegerin (OPG) gene levels indb/dbmice [210]. These proteins are
pro-ossification and antibone resorption, and this ultimately resulted in increased mineral apposition rate, bone formation rate, and increased osteoblast numbers in cancellous
bone. These beneficial effects on bone cells are supported by Li et al. (2015), who tested
ovariectomized rats with vibration (35 Hz at 0.25 g) [211]. They found that vibration upregulated the expression of BMP-2 and Runx2, activated the ERK1/2 signaling pathway, and
consequently led to increased expression of OCN. These proteins are also pro-ossification.
They also noted that the anabolic effect of mechanical stimulation was enhanced with
the incorporation of resting period between loadings. These findings were replicated by
Sun et al. (2019) who showed that MLO-Y4 osteocyte like cells stimulated by 45 Hz at
0.5 g promoted the secretion of prostaglandin E2 and OPG, and inhibited the secretion of
tumor necrosis factor-╬▒ and RANKL [212]. Tanaka et al. (2003) found similar results testing
osteoblasts in vitro with vibration [213]. Lau et al. [206] found that stimulation of MLO-Y4
osteocyte cells stimulated with low amplitude high frequency vibration (0.3 g; 30, 60, and
90 Hz) had a variety of antibone resorption effects, which varied with frequency. They
found that osteocytes increased the expression of COX-2 at 90 Hz, while RANKL decreased
most significantly at 60 Hz. Conditioned medium collected from the vibrated osteocytes
cells inhibited the formation of large osteoclasts and the amount of osteoclastic resorption
by 20% [206]. Similar findings have been found in other studies and have also found an
increase on chondrogenic factors such as collagen type I and II, and have shown corre-

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

21 of 35

sponding improvements of fractures from radiographs and histomorphometry [214,215].
Computed tomography imaging evidence on fracture healing showed that ovariectomized
mice undergoing 45 Hz vibration treatment demonstrated improved callus properties,
with increased flexural rigidity and bone formation in addition to the cellular effects as
mentioned above [216].
The mechanism behind the frequency dependency of osteocyte response to vibration is not well understood. At lower frequencies (<10 Hz), fluid flow may be what
mediates vibration mediated effects, causing calcium oscillations in cells when vibration is
applied [217]. Due to the viscoelasticity of cells, cells are less stiff and thus more deformable
at lower frequencies. Such deformation caused by fluid shear stress requires contact stress
acting primarily on the cell membrane [208]. Consequently, cilia, which are small hair
like structures protruding from the cell membrane, are considered important structures
for mechanosensation. Li et al. (2020) found that chemicals which damage primary cilia
inhibited vibration-induced osteogenic responses (differentiation, mineralization, and maturation) in osteocytes, indicating that vibration-induced osteogenic effects are mediated
through cilia [218]. At higher frequencies there is a chance that fluid stress is attenuated,
and it is suggested that at frequencies above 10 Hz, the movement of solid intracellular
bodies such as the nucleus may drive the cellular effects of vibration. Bacabac et al. (2006)
found that the rate of acceleration generated by the vibration frequency was correlated
with the amount of force acting on the nucleus of vibrated bone cells.
The effects of vibration may have differing effects on different bones of the body and
depending on how vibration is applied. Pravitharangul et al. (2018) found that vibration
of bone cells from the iliac had reduced resorptive protein expression but that effect was
not found in mandible bone cells [219]. Interestingly, Rubin et al. (2004) showed that
whole body vibration signal was maximally transmitted to the hip and spine of people in a
standing position [220]. Komrakova et al. (2013) investigated various vibration parameters
on fracture healing in mice and found that vertical vibrations of 35 and 50 Hz produced
more favorable results than the higher frequencies and horizontal vibrations showed no
positive or negative effects. Specifically, vertical vibrations (>35 Hz) improved cortical and
callus densities, enlarged callus area and width, accelerated osteotomy bridging (35 and
50 Hz), and increased relative muscle weight (50 Hz) [221].
Estrogen levels may also influence whether vibration generates positive or null effects
on bone cells. Haffner-Luntzer et al. [222] found that vibration applied at 45 Hz stimulation
of osteoblast cells had either positive bone forming effects of gene expression or a null
effect depending on the presence of estrogen. They found that bone cells increased COX-2
gene expression, cell metabolic activity, and cell proliferation after vibration in the absence
of estrogen, whereas the contrary was true in the presence of estrogen [222].
This indicates that considerably more research is needed to determine the optimal
frequency, amplitude, and direction of vibration for desired bone effects. As well, specific
important contextual considerations need to be explored to derive the intended effects
of vibrations.
Application: Treating Osteoporosis and Bone Loss
An important application of vibration in humans is to stimulate bone healing and growth,
especially in response to fractures or osteoporosis. Rubin et al. (2004) performed a prospective,
randomized, double-blinded, and placebo-controlled trial of 70 postmenopausal women
with brief periods of vibration applied at 30 Hz and 0.2 g [220]. DXA scanning was used
to measure bone mineral density in the spine, hip, and distal radius at baseline, 3, 6, and
12 months. They found that vibration treatment significantly reduced bone loss in the spine
and femur, with efficacy increasing with greater compliance and for those with lower body
mass. Although bone loss was reduced, there did not seem to be any indications of a net
increase in bone mass being created. In a more recent study, ElDeeb and Abdel-Aziem
(2020) showed that vibration in conjunction with exercise can improve the bone mineral

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

22 of 35

density (BMD) of post-menopausal women with osteoporosis [223]. Other clinical studies
have shown similar results to suggest positive effects on osteoporotic BMD [224,225].
Matute-Llorente et al. (2015) performed a randomized controlled trial of adolescents
with Down syndrome using whole body vibration, with primary outcomes being bone
mineral content and BMD [226]. Adolescents with Down syndrome (DS) tend to have
poorer bone health than peers without DS. They found that the vibration treated group
increased in bone mineral content and density as a whole and specifically in the lumbar
spine area and the tibia. Another randomized, placebo controlled trial found that vibration
treatment for children with cerebral palsy improved BMD in tibial regions and the spine
compared to controls, even though compliance to using the device was only 44% [227].
Therefore, it can be seen that the beneficial osteogenic effects of vibration on bone
health are prominent across different age groups and medical conditions with differing
etiologies. What is common is the fact that osteoporosis, down syndrome, and cerebral
palsy are disabling conditions that reduce mechanical stimulation of the bones due to a
lack of activity or strength in muscles and bone. Since the nature of the vibratory stimulus
is based on providing a surrogate for high frequency muscle based signals, this may be
used successfully to treat conditions that limit such stimulation naturally. Given that the
vibration parameters are constrained to 1ŌĆō100 Hz at less than 1 g magnitude [228], there is
a net beneficial effect of vibration on the bone strength and health in humans.
4.4. Basic Mechanism: Anabolic Effects on the Spine and Intervertebral Discs
The spine is an important component of the skeletal system that is crucial for structural
integrity of the body and housing the spinal cord, which connects the peripheral nerves to
the central nervous system. The spine consists of 33 vertebral segments, the upper 24 are
articulating and separated by each other by intervertebral discs, and the lower nine are
fused in adults. Each disc acts as a cushion-like joint between vertebral segments, allowing
for slight movement while holding the segments together and acting as a shock-absorber. In
this section the effects of vibration on the spine and associated structures will be explored.
The vertebral segments of the spine display the same effect from vibration as any
other bone, in that there is an increase in BMD after vibration stimulation [23]. What is of
great interest however is the effects of vibration on the intervertebral discs (IVD), as the
degeneration of the intervertebral discs is considered as an important pathogeny for spinal
disorders and low back pain [229]. Desmoulin et al. (2013) tested bovine IVD in multiples
studies with 0ŌĆō200 Hz vibration and found an increase in mRNA expression of aggrecan,
collagen type I and II, decorin, and versican in significant amounts [230ŌĆō232]. Another
study found similar results in living mice treated with 15ŌĆō90 Hz vibration at 0.3 g, showing
an increase in the expression of aggrecan, biglycan, decorin, type I collagen, and Sox9 [233].
Liang et al. (2017) found that vertical and whole body vibration in rats (0.49 g at 30 Hz)
increased expression of aggrecan, collagen type I and II, and decorin [234]. Aggrecan is
a proteoglycan with primarily a mechanical function in the tissue matrix and is vital for
disc health. Analysis of excised painful IVD has shown the presence of nerves and blood
vessels that have intruded into the disc, and this has been suggested to be a result of altered
aggrecan content in the IVD [235]. Decorin is a small proteoglycan produced by neurons
and astrocytes and has an anti-inflammatory effect and regulates scarring in the spinal cord.
For this reason, Decorin has been suggested as a treatment for spinal cord injury [236].
Biglycan is a small molecule that is important in the mineralization of bone and also plays
a role in the osmotic swelling in the IVD, and versican is a large proteoglycan, which
functions in cell adhesion and cell signaling [234]. Collagen type I and II are important
components of the annulus fibrosus and nucleus pulposus respectively [234]. Taken
together, the expression of these genes produces an anabolic effect, which improves the
health of the discs and maintains its hydration and shock absorbing capabilities. In low
back pain, abnormal mechanical loading leads to internal disc disruption [237ŌĆō239], cellmediated loss of water content and disc height, and is associated with a loss of aggrecan
and collagen content within the disc [240,241]. The disc releases proinflammatory cytokines

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

23 of 35

promoting the infiltration and activation of immune cells that potentiate nerve and blood
vessel growth further. The degenerated disc and the immune cells begin to produce
neurogenic factors that activate nociceptive nerve signals to produce the sensation of disc
related pain [242]. Therefore, vibration treatment may serve to counteract these types of
effects seen in the progression of disc degeneration that leads to pain.
Application: Focused Vibration for Chronic Back Pain
An important emerging application for vibration among human patients is for the
treatment of spine related chronic back and neck pain. Desmoulin et al. (2007 and 2007)
conducted two similar studies recruiting both chronic neck pain and chronic back pain
patients and tested vibration (80ŌĆō120 Hz) delivered directly to the C1 vertebrae of the
spine. They found a significant improvement in pain, an improvement in range of motion,
and a reduction in pain medication dosage after one month of vibration stimulation. The
improved pain may be due to the anabolic effects of vibration on the intervertebral discs,
which could have an anti-inflammatory effect to prevent discogenic back pain. Another
possible mechanism may be that vibration analgesia is produced by neural input at specific
frequencies that alter central nervous system processes [107,243,244], however it is still
unclear how this may work. Range of motion of the spine has also improved and is likely
due to vibration. Keller et al. (2000) quantified the mobility characteristics of human
thoracolumbar spines with transient vibration stimulation [245]. They found that the
thoracic region of the spine is more mobile than the lumbar spine, and found 40 Hz and
80 Hz to be the best for inducing mobility. Although the mechanism is not yet fully clear, it
is suggested that vibrations at the resonant frequency of the spine are the most potent at
inducing improvements in mobility. These findings support the results of another clinical
study by Desmoulin et al. (2012) that found that focal vibration stimulation of the C1
of the vertebrae translated to postural improvements of spinal alignment in the cervical
spine [147]. This study measured the mean axis of rotation of cervical spines from flexionŌĆō
extension X-ray imaging to quantify the degree of spinal alignment. Vibration delivered to
the cervical spine was able to significantly correct misaligned cervical spines of 44 patients
with chronic neck pain. Since spinal alignment is an important factor in chiropractic and
orthopedic practice and its role in back pain is established [246], the correction of spinal
posture using vibration may be another mechanism behind pain relief.
5. Discussion and Conclusions
5.1. Reporting Suggestions
An important observation from this review of vibration literature is how precisely
the application of vibration is reported in studies. Research studies typically report some
combination of the following: (1) the frequency of the vibratory stimulant in Hertz, (2) the
amplitude in mm of the vibration, which is defined as the maximum displacement by a
point on a vibrating body from its equilibrium position, (3) the acceleration of a point on
the vibrating body measured in metric units (m/s2 ) or units of gravitational constant g,
where 1 g = 9.81 m/s2 , (4) the pressure of vibration measured as dyn/cm2 , which indicates
the force of 1 g accelerated by 1 cm per second squared; or as pGz indicating periodic (p)
vibrational acceleration (G) along the z axis (horizontal), which in research is typically
between 1 and 4 Hz, and (5) the duration of the stimulant as well as how often it is applied
over days/weeks/months.
There are two main inconsistencies regarding reporting the characteristics of vibrations. First, the inconsistency of what is considered ŌĆ£high frequencyŌĆØ and what is considered ŌĆ£low frequencyŌĆØ. For example, some studies describe vibrations of 30ŌĆō100 Hz as
high frequency [206,208,220,222] (the perspective of a whole body platform that moves
mechanically), whereas other studies report anywhere from 0 to 200 Hz as low frequency [70,115,119,155,180] (the perspective of sound). This is largely due to the scientific
contexts in which researchers are interested, but such contextual labels make the synthesis
of knowledge in vibration more difficult than it needs to be. We recommend simply saying

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

24 of 35

ŌĆ£vibration at X frequencyŌĆØ. If one wishes to be descriptive, it is better to describe the nature
of the vibration or applied area rather than saying it is high or low. For example, one may
investigate the effects of percussive vibration, acoustic vibration, globally, or focally applied
vibration. We used the term ŌĆ£low frequencyŌĆØ to describe 0ŌĆō250 Hz vibration because this
paper is presented in the context of music and sound.
The second inconsistency is in reporting of the amount of surface of the body that
is stimulated and the relative distribution of the vibratory effect. For studies in WBV
the entire body is stimulated but the actual vibratory transmission can be dependent on
posture and stance. With vibroacoustic stimulation devices, the application can be almost
the entire body with speakers above the knee, lower back, upper back, and neck [40] or
primarily the back with a single transducer in the centre of the back [41], or only hands
and feet with small piezoelectric devices [247], or as small as a pencil-like probe [32,147].
Therefore, we recommend to add a sixth reporting category: (6) the region of the body that
is directly stimulated by vibration (e.g., spine, low back, neck, feet, and whole-body).
As a result of the different methods of measurement, an important consideration is
which measurements should be reported at a minimum to replicate studies of vibration
on human health and accurately compare different studies. Not all six categories of
measurement described above need to be reported because some allow conversion to other
units. For example, displacement can be determined by velocity and frequency, velocity can
be determined by frequency and displacement, acceleration can be determined by frequency
and displacement, and pressure can be determined by force (a function of acceleration and
mass) and the area applied. Therefore, reporting standards for vibration studies on health
should have a pragmatic number of measurements that can allow conversions to other
units if need be. We recommend a minimum of (4) measurements: the frequency (in Hz),
the acceleration (in g), the duration of stimulus (time applied and over how many days),
and the area of the body stimulated (e.g., spine, back, whole-body, or a measured area in
units). The area of applied vibration is a new but important reporting standard to consider.
5.2. Clinical Implications
This attempt to ŌĆ£map the landscapeŌĆØ of the mechanisms of vibrational effect on
the body has shown that research is beginning to identify how vibration affects ŌĆ£blood,
brain, and boneŌĆØ but that the means of the effect is highly complex. There is ample
evidence that whether a person is standing in front of a tower of speakers at a rock concert,
dancing to a pulsating beat, feeling the quake of pipe organ pedal tone, travelling on the
underground train, riding a carriage on cobble stones, using a handheld vibrator, standing
on an oscillating platform in a gym, sitting in a vibroacoustic chair, or having the spine
treated with a vibrating stylus there is potential for effects that can affect health positively
or negatively.
Throughout the paper we pointed to potential clinical applications. In some cases,
these are already being used as in the case of whole body vibration for osteoporosis, or
focal application to the spine for orthopedic conditions. However, most of the potential
applications still need to be clinically recognized and commercialized in medically regulated products so that specific claims and, consequently, medical prescription can become
generally practiced. The potential for this is indicated by the research in haemodynamics,
in neurology, and in musculoskeletal conditions.
Professional organizations to promote and research these effects of vibration include VIBRAC (https://www.vibrac.fi/) (accessed on 21 April 2021), which is focused on vibracoustic
therapy for a large but mainly unspecified range of health conditions and WAVEX: World Association of Vibration Exercise Experts (https://internationalwavexmeeting.wordpress.com/)
(accessed on 21 April 2021) focused on WBV for physical and cognitive health.
Although mechanisms of action stemming from vibration appear to be clinically relevant in many situations, caution must be urged that in many cases the research employed
animal studies. In many cases results from animal studies can be replicated in humans but

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

25 of 35

that is not a certainty. Consequently, translation to clinical applications is not immediate
and may not be successful.
5.3. Future Research
Our review has shown that much more specific research is needed. For example,
research needs to determine whether vibroacoustic stimulation of the torso in a chair
has similar effects as whole body vibration on a platform on the muscles in frail people.
Research needs to explore more fully the effect of frequency on specific mechanisms.
For example, how is nitric oxide positively correlated and prostaglandin E2 negatively
correlated with frequency and, therefore, what is a target frequency for what specific effect.
Similarly, our review showed examples of how vibration at one amplitude was positive
and at another was negative. The complexity of mechanism response to vibration makes
clinical application and conclusion of effect difficult. Interacting variables on multiple
mechanisms including duration, strength, cycle, frequency, application location and area,
and patient group make control of specific outcomes a challenge and frame the agenda for
urgently needed research to advance this potentially potent form of treatment.
An important observation from this effort to ŌĆ£map the landscapeŌĆØ is that there is not
an integrated ŌĆ£fieldŌĆØ of vibrational research. Rather there are individual silos that seem
to function in isolation of each other. This even applies to the type of stimulus. WBV
has developed as one silo because of the device and strong application within athletics
and sports training and medicine. Vibroacoustic therapy is another silo, less developed
although not new, and with less awareness of mechanism in its research. The most diverse
and so not even qualifying as a ŌĆ£siloŌĆØ is focal vibration with applications ranging from
orthopaedic treatment, to temporomandibular joint pain management, to orthodontic tooth
movement, to tissue engineering, or to orthopedics. The reality may be that the person in
the gym seeking to strengthen the muscles of the body core on a vibrating platform may be
doing much more than they realize. It is time for these separate but related research streams
to explore commonalities and shared research questions to move this clearly important
field forward to advance clinical applications in healthcare.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.B.; writingŌĆöoriginal draft preparation, L.B. and A.M.;
writingŌĆöreview and editing, L.B. and A.M. Both authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: Thank you to the following for reviewing and making helpful suggestions on
the paper draft: Lidan You, University of Toronto, for the Musculoskeletal section, Andrew Hoffman,
Ahof Biophysical Systems Inc, Burnaby, BC, Canada, for the Hemodynamic section, Ana Andreazza,
University of Toronto for the Hemodynamic and Neurological sections.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

MacDonald, R.; Kreutz, G.; Mitchell, L. What is Music, Health, and Wellbeing and Why is it Important? In Music, Health, and
Wellbeing; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2012; ISBN 9780191738357.
Spintge, R.; Droh, R. Introductory Remarks. In MusicMedicine; MMB Music Inc.: St. Louis, MO, USA, 1992; pp. 1ŌĆō2.
Maranto, D. Foreword. In The Art & Science of Music Therapy: A Handbook; Wigram, T., Saperston, B., West, R., Eds.; Routledge:
New York, NY, USA, 1995; pp. ixŌĆōxii.
Dworkin, R.H.; Turk, D.C.; Farrar, J.T.; Haythornthwaite, J.A.; Jensen, M.P.; Katz, N.P.; Kerns, R.D.; Stucki, G.; Allen, R.R.; Bellamy,
N.; et al. Core outcome measures for chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT recommendations. Pain 2005, 113, 9ŌĆō19. [CrossRef]
Craver, C.; Bechtel, W. Mechanisms and mechanistic explanation. In The Philosophy of Science: An Encyclopedia; Sarkar, S., Pfeifer, J.,
Eds.; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2006; pp. 469ŌĆō478.

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

26 of 35

Stegem├Čller, E. Exploring the Mechanisms of Music Therapy|The Scientist Magazine┬« . Available online: https://www.thescientist.com/features/exploring-the-mechanisms-of-music-therapy-31936 (accessed on 25 March 2021).
Cheever, T.; Taylor, A.; Finkelstein, R.; Edwards, E.; Thomas, L.; Bradt, J.; Holochwost, S.J.; Johnson, J.K.; Limb, C.; Patel, A.D.; et al.
NIH/Kennedy Center Workshop on Music and the Brain: Finding Harmony. Neuron 2018, 97, 1214ŌĆō1218. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chanda, M.L.; Levitin, D.J. The neurochemistry of music. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2013, 17, 179ŌĆō193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
M├Čckel, M.; R├Čcker, L.; St├Črk, T.; Vollert, J.; Danne, O.; Eichst├żdt, H.; M├╝ller, R.; Hochrein, H. Immediate physiological responses
of healthy volunteers to different types of music: Cardiovascular, hormonal and mental changes. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup.
Physiol. 1994, 68, 451ŌĆō459. [CrossRef]
Clements-Cortes, A.; Bartel, L. Are We Doing More Than We Know? Possible Mechanisms of Response to Music Therapy. Front.
Med. 2018, 5, 255. [CrossRef]
Thaut, M. Neurologic music therapy: From social science to neuroscience. In Handbook of Neurologic Music Therapy; Thaut, M.,
McIntosh, G., Eds.; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2014; pp. 1ŌĆō6.
Altenm├╝ller, E.; Marco-Pallares, J.; M├╝nte, T.F.; Schneider, S. Neural Reorganization Underlies Improvement in Stroke-induced
Motor Dysfunction by Music-supported Therapy. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2009, 1169, 395ŌĆō405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kopell, N.J.; Gritton, H.J.; Whittington, M.A.; Kramer, M.A. Beyond the connectome: The dynome. Neuron 2014, 83, 1319ŌĆō1328.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Albouy, P.; Baillet, S.; Zatorre, R.J. Driving working memory with frequency-tuned noninvasive brain stimulation. Ann. N. Y.
Acad. Sci. 2018, 1423, 126ŌĆō137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Snyder, R. Music and Memory: An Introduction; The MIT Press: Cambridge MA, USA, 2000.
Julien, C. The enigma of Mayer waves: Facts and models. Cardiovasc. Res. 2006, 70, 12ŌĆō21. [CrossRef]
Mansfield, N. Human Response to Vibration; CRC Press: New York, NY, USA, 2005.
Castelo Branco, N.A.A.; Alves-Pereira, M. Vibroacoustic disease. Noise Health 2004, 6, 3ŌĆō20.
Goetz, C.G. Jean-Martin Charcot and his vibratory chair for Parkinson disease. Neurology 2009, 73, 475ŌĆō478. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Vibratory Therapeutics. Scientific American; Springer Nature: New York, NY, USA, 1892; p. 265.
Charcot, J.M. Vibratory therapeutics.-The application of rapid and continuous vibrations to the tre├®tment of certain diseases of
the nervous system. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 2011, 199, 821ŌĆō827. [PubMed]
Kaeding, T. The Historical Evolution of the Therapeutic Application of Whole Body Vibrations: Any Lessons to be Learned?
Austin Sports Med. 2016, 1, 1003. Available online: https://www.google.com/search?q=The+historical+evolution+of+the+
therapeutic+application+of+whole+body+vibrations%3A+Any+lessons+to+be+learned%3F.+Austin+Sports+Med.+2016%
3B+1%281%29%3A+1003&sxsrf=ALeKk00utCNcrNOm3vhwsxzu4OaTVMl7qg%3A1616723928312&source=h (accessed on
25 March 2021).
Mar├Łn-Cascales, E.; Alcaraz, P.E.; Ramos-Campo, D.J.; Martinez-Rodriguez, A.; Chung, L.H.; Rubio-Arias, J. Whole-body
vibration training and bone health in postmenopausal women: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine 2018, 97, e11918.
[CrossRef]
Del Pozo-Cruz, B.; Adsuar, J.C.; Parraca, J.A.; Del Pozo-Cruz, J.; Olivares, P.R.; Gusi, N. Using whole-body vibration training in
patients affected with common neurological diseases: A systematic literature review. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 2012, 18, 29ŌĆō41.
[CrossRef]
Wigram, A. The Effect of Vibroacoustic Therapy on Clinical and Non-Clinical Populations. Ph.D. Thesis, London University,
London, UK, 1996.
Skille, O. VibroAcoustic Therapy. Music Ther. 1989, 8, 61ŌĆō77. [CrossRef]
Lehikoinen, P. The physioacoustic method. In Music Vibration and Health; Wigram, T., Dileo, C., Eds.; Jeffrey Books: Cherry Hill,
NJ, USA, 1997; pp. 209ŌĆō215.
Campbell, E.A. Vibroacoustic Treatment and Self-Care for Managing the Chronic Pain Experience: An Operational Model. Ph.D.
Thesis, University of Jyv├żskyl├ż, Jyv├żskyl├żn Yliopisto, Finland, 2019.
Tyack, P.L. Bioacoustics. In Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences: Second Edition; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2001; pp. 357ŌĆō363,
ISBN 9780123744739.
Naghdi, L.; Ahonen, H.; Macario, P.; Bartel, L. The effect of low-frequency sound stimulation on patients with fibromyalgia: A
clinical study. Pain Res. Manag. 2015, 20, e21ŌĆōe27. [CrossRef]
Stenfelt, S. Acoustic and physiologic aspects of bone conduction hearing. Adv. Otorhinolaryngol. 2011, 71, 10ŌĆō21.
Bartel, L.R.; Chen, R.; Alain, C.; Ross, B. Vibroacoustic Stimulation and Brain Oscillation: From Basic Research to Clinical
Application. Music Med. 2017, 9, 153ŌĆō166. [CrossRef]
Adams, J.A.; Uryash, A.; Bassuk, J.; Sackner, M.A.; Kurlansky, P. Biological basis of neuroprotection and neurotherapeutic effects
of Whole Body Periodic Acceleration (pGz). Med. Hypotheses 2014, 82, 681ŌĆō687. [CrossRef]
Maloney-Hinds, C.; Petrofsky, J.S.; Zimmerman, G.; Hessinger, D.A. The role of nitric oxide in skin blood flow increases due to
vibration in healthy adults and adults with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Technol. Ther. 2009, 11, 39ŌĆō43. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Johnson, K.O. The roles and functions of cutaneous mechanoreceptors. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2001, 11, 455ŌĆō461. [CrossRef]
Gilman, S. Joint position sense and vibration sense: Anatomical organisation and assessment. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry
2002, 73, 473ŌĆō477. [CrossRef]
Lehikoinen, P. Physioacoustic Sound in Stimulation of Cell Membranes; Next Wave Ltd.: Helsinki, Finland, 1996.

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

38.

39.
40.
41.
42.

43.
44.
45.
46.

47.

48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.

60.

61.
62.
63.

27 of 35

Skille, O.; Wigram, T. The effects of music, vocalization and vibration on brain and muscle tissues: Studies in vibroacoustic
therapy. In The Art & Science of Music Therapy: A Handbook; Wigram, T., Saperson, B., West, R., Eds.; Routledge: New York, NY,
USA, 1995; pp. 23ŌĆō57.
Karkkainen, M.; Mitsui, J. The effects of sound based vibration treatment on the human mind and body: The physioacoustic
method. J. Int. Soc. Life Inf. Sci. 2006, 24, 155.
Mosabbir, A.; Almeida, Q.J.; Ahonen, H. The Effects of Long-Term 40-Hz Physioacoustic Vibrations on Motor Impairments in
ParkinsonŌĆÖs Disease: A Double-Blinded Randomized Control Trial. Healthcare 2020, 8, 113. [CrossRef]
Vuong, V.; Mosabbir, A.; Paneduro, D.; Picard, L.; Faghfoury, H.; Evans, M.; Gordon, A.; Bartel, L. Effects of Rhythmic Sensory
Stimulation on EhlersŌĆōDanlos Syndrome: A Pilot Study. Pain Res. Manag. 2020, 2020, 3586767. [CrossRef]
Iaccarino, H.F.; Singer, A.C.; Martorell, A.J.; Rudenko, A.; Gao, F.; Gillingham, T.Z.; Mathys, H.; Seo, J.; Kritskiy, O.;
Abdurrob, F.; et al. Gamma frequency entrainment attenuates amyloid load and modifies microglia. Nature 2016, 540, 230ŌĆō235.
[CrossRef]
Clements-Cortes, A.; Ahonen, H.; Evans, M.; Freedman, M.; Bartel, L. Short-Term Effects of Rhythmic Sensory Stimulation in
AlzheimerŌĆÖs Disease: An Exploratory Pilot Study. J. AlzheimerŌĆÖs Dis. 2016, 52, 651ŌĆō660. [CrossRef]
King, L.K.; Almeida, Q.J.; Ahonen, H. Short-term effects of vibration therapy on motor impairments in ParkinsonŌĆÖs disease.
NeuroRehabilitation 2009, 25, 297ŌĆō306. [CrossRef]
Wysocki, A.; Mary Butler, M.; Shamliyan, T.; Robert Kane, M.L. Whole-Body Vibration Therapy for Osteoporosis. Ann. Intern.
Med. 2011, 15, 680ŌĆō686. [CrossRef]
Osteoporosis Prevention Product Wins FDA Breakthrough Device DesignationŌĆōBone Health Technologies. Available online: http:
//www.bonehealthtech.com/2020/12/15/osteoporosis-prevention-product-wins-fda-breakthrough-device-designation/ (accessed on 29 April 2021).
FDA Permits Marketing of New Device Designed to Reduce Sleep Disturbance Related to Nightmares in Certain Adults|FDA.
Available online: https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-permits-marketing-new-device-designedreduce-sleep-disturbance-related-nightmares-certain-adults (accessed on 29 April 2021).
Sethi, S.; Yin, J.; Anderson, P.K. Lung flute improves symptoms and health status in COPD with chronic bronchitis: A 26 week
randomized controlled trial. Clin. Transl. Med. 2014, 3, 29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shipley, T.; Farouk, K.; El-Bialy, T. Effect of high-frequency vibration on orthodontic tooth movement and bone density. J. Orthod.
Sci. 2019, 8, 15.
Uryash, A.; Adams, J. Vibroacoustic Noninvasive Stimulation (VATS) of Human Coronary Endothelial Cells Induced Syndecan-4,
VEGF and KLF2 Mechanosensor Control of eNOS|Circulation. Circulation 2018, 136, A18011.
Uryash, A.; Adams, J. Wearable Vibroacoustic Transthoracic Stimulation (VATS) Provides Cardioprotection by Syndecan-4
Mechanosensor Regulation of NFAT, JNK/ERK in Rats after Myocardial Infarction|Circulation. Circulation 2018, 136, 17906.
Chen, K.; Pittman, R.N.; Popel, A.S. Nitric oxide in the vasculature: Where does it come from and where does it go? A quantitative
perspective. Antioxid. Redox Signal 2008, 10, 1185ŌĆō1198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
White, C.R.; Haidekker, M.A.; Stevens, H.Y.; Frangos, J.A. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation and endothelin-1
production in human endothelial cells exposed to vibration. J. Physiol. 2004, 555, 565ŌĆō572. [CrossRef]
Uryash, A.; Wu, H.; Bassuk, J.; Kurlansky, P.; Sackner, M.A.; Adams, J.A. Low-amplitude pulses to the circulation through
periodic acceleration induces endothelial-dependent vasodilatation. J. Appl. Physiol. 2009, 106, 1840ŌĆō1847. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ichioka, S.; Yokogawa, H.; Nakagami, G.; Sekiya, N.; Hiromi, S. In vivo analysis of skin microcirculation and the role of nitric
oxide during vibration. Ostomy Wound Manag. 2011, 57, 40ŌĆō47.
Uryash, A.; Adams, J. Wearable Vibroacoustic Transthoracic Stimulation Improves Left Ventricular Function, Remodeling and
Regulates Syndecan-4 /VEGF Levels in Rats After Myocardial Infarction|Circulation. Circulation 2018, 134, A17052.
Skoglund, C.R. Vasodilatation in human skin induced by low-amplitude high-frequency vibration. Clin. Physiol. 1989, 9, 361ŌĆō372.
[CrossRef]
Johnson, P.K.; Feland, J.B.; Johnson, A.W.; Mack, G.W.; Mitchell, U.H. Effect of whole body vibration on skin blood flow and nitric
oxide production. J. Diabetes Sci. Technol. 2014, 8, 889ŌĆō894. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Adams, J.A.; Bassuk, J.A.; Arias, J.; Wu, H.; Jorapur, V.; Lamas, G.A.; Kurlansky, P. Periodic acceleration (pGz) CPR in a swine
model of asphyxia induced cardiac arrest. Short-term hemodynamic comparisons. Resuscitation 2008, 77, 132ŌĆō138. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Adams, J.A.; Uryash, A.; Wu, H.; Bassuk, J.A.; Nadkarni, V.; Berg, R.; Jorapur, V.; Kurlansky, P. Microcirculatory and therapeutic
effects of whole body periodic acceleration (pGz) applied after cardiac arrest in pigs. Resuscitation 2011, 82, 767ŌĆō775. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Adams, J.A.; Wu, H.; Bassuk, J.A.; Arias, J.; Uryash, A.; Jorapur, V.; Lamas, G.A.; Kurlansky, P. Periodic acceleration (pGz) prior to
whole body Ischemia reperfusion injury provides early cardioprotective preconditioning. Life Sci. 2010, 86, 707ŌĆō715. [CrossRef]
Bassuk, J.I.; Wu, H.; Arias, J.; Kurlansky, P.; Adams, J.A. Whole body periodic acceleration (pGz) improves survival and allows
for resuscitation in a model of severe hemorrhagic shock in pigs. J. Surg. Res. 2010, 164, e281ŌĆōe289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Lopez, J.R.; Uryash, A.; Kolster, J.; Est├©ve, E.; Zhang, R.; Adams, J.A. Enhancing Endogenous Nitric Oxide by Whole Body
Periodic Acceleration Elicits Neuroprotective Effects in Dystrophic Neurons. Mol. Neurobiol. 2018, 55, 8680ŌĆō8694. [CrossRef]

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

64.
65.
66.
67.

68.
69.

70.

71.
72.

73.
74.

75.
76.
77.
78.
79.

80.
81.

82.
83.
84.
85.

86.
87.

88.
89.

28 of 35

Mart├Łnez, A.; Arias, J.; Bassuk, J.A.; Wu, H.; Kurlansky, P.; Adams, J.A. Adrenomedullin Is Increased by Pulsatile Shear Stress on
the Vascular Endothelium via Periodic Acceleration (PGz). Peptides 2008, 29, 73ŌĆō78. [CrossRef]
Uryash, A.; Bassuk, J.; Kurlansky, P.; Altamirano, F.; Lopez, J.R.; Adams, J.A. Antioxidant Properties of Whole Body Periodic
Acceleration (pGz). PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0131392. [CrossRef]
Hoffmann, A.; Gill, H. Externally Applied Vibration at 50 Hz Facilitates Dissolution of Blood Clots In-Vitro. Am. J. Biomed. Sci.
2012, 4, 274ŌĆō284. [CrossRef]
Hoffmann, A.; Gill, H. Diastolic timed Vibro-Percussion at 50 Hz delivered across a chest wall sized meat barrier enhances clot
dissolution and remotely administered Streptokinase effectiveness in an in-vitro model of acute coronary thrombosis. Thromb. J.
2012, 10, 23. [CrossRef]
Faine, B.A.; Dayal, S.; Kumar, R.; Lentz, S.R.; Leira, E.C. Helicopter ŌĆ£Drip and ShipŌĆØ Flights Do Not Alter the Pharmacological
Integrity of rtPA. J. Stroke Cerebrovasc. Dis. 2018, 27, 2720ŌĆō2724. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Leira, E.C.; Zaheer, A.; Schnell, T.; Torner, J.C.; Olalde, H.M.; Pieper, A.A.; Ortega-Gutierrez, S.; Nagaraja, N.; Marks, N.L.; Adams,
H.P. Effect of helicopter transport on neurological outcomes in a mouse model of embolic stroke with reperfusion: AIR-MICE
pilot study. Int. J. Stroke 2015, 10, 119ŌĆō124. [CrossRef]
Dhanesha, N.; Schnell, T.; Rahmatalla, S.; Deshaw, J.; Thedens, D.; Parker, B.M.; Zimmerman, M.B.; Pieper, A.A.; Chauhan, A.K.;
Leira, E.C. Low-Frequency Vibrations Enhance Thrombolytic Therapy and Improve Stroke Outcomes. Stroke 2020, 51, 1855ŌĆō1861.
[CrossRef]
Kawamura, K.; Kano, Y. Electrical stimulation induces neurite outgrowth in PC12m3 cells via the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathway. Neurosci. Lett. 2019, 698, 81ŌĆō84. [CrossRef]
Koike, Y.; iwamoto, S.; kimata, Y.; nohno, T.; hiragami, F.; kawamura, K.; numata, K.; Murai, H.; Okisima, K.; Iwata, M.; et al.
Low-frequency vibratory sound induces neurite outgrowth in pc12m3 cells in which nerve growth factor-induced neurite
outgrowth is impaired. Tissue Cult. Res. Commun. 2004, 23, 81ŌĆō90.
Cho, H.; Seo, Y.K.; Jeon, S.; Yoon, H.H.; Choi, Y.K.; Park, J.K. Neural differentiation of umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells by
sub-sonic vibration. Life Sci. 2012, 90, 591ŌĆō599. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kim, H.J.; Kim, J.H.; Song, Y.J.; Seo, Y.K.; Park, J.K.; Kim, C.W. Overexpressed Calponin3 by Subsonic Vibration Induces Neural
Differentiation of hUC-MSCs by Regulating the Ionotropic Glutamate Receptor. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2015, 177, 48ŌĆō62.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Choi, Y.K.; Cho, H.; Seo, Y.K.; Yoon, H.H.; Park, J.K. Stimulation of sub-sonic vibration promotes the differentiation of adipose
tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells into neural cells. Life Sci. 2012, 91, 329ŌĆō337. [CrossRef]
Kantor, J.; Kantorov├Ī, L.; Marec╠īkov├Ī, J.; Peng, D.; Vil├Łmek, Z. Potential of vibroacoustic therapy in persons with cerebral palsy:
An advanced narrative review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 3940. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kantele, S.; Karinkanta, S.; Siev├żnen, H. Effects of long-term whole-body vibration training on mobility in patients with multiple
sclerosis: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J. Neurol. Sci. 2015, 358, 31ŌĆō37. [CrossRef]
Lundeberg, T.; Nordemar, R.; Ottoson, D. Pain alleviation by vibratory stimulation. Pain 1984, 20, 25ŌĆō44. [CrossRef]
Usoskin, D.; Zilberter, M.; Linnarsson, S.; Hjerling-Leffler, J.; Uhl├®n, P.; Harkany, T.; Ernfors, P. En masse in vitro functional
profiling of the axonal mechanosensitivity of sensory neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 16336ŌĆō16341. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Katusic, A.; Alimovic, S.; Mejaski-Bosnjak, V. The effect of vibration therapy on spasticity and motor function in children with
cerebral palsy: A randomized controlled trial. NeuroRehabilitation 2013, 32, 1ŌĆō8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Gay, A.; Parratte, S.; Salazard, B.; Guinard, D.; Pham, T.; Legr├®, R.; Roll, J.P. Proprioceptive feedback enhancement induced by
vibratory stimulation in complex regional pain syndrome type I: An open comparative pilot study in 11 patients. Jt. Bone Spine
2007, 74, 461ŌĆō466. [CrossRef]
Delecluse, C.; Roelants, M.; Verschueren, S. Strength Increase after Whole-Body Vibration Compared with Resistance Training.
Med. Sci. Sport. Exerc. 2003, 35, 1033ŌĆō1041. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ko, M.S.; Sim, Y.J.; Kim, D.H.; Jeon, H.S. Effects of three weeks of whole-body vibration training on joint-position sense, balance,
and gait in children with cerebral palsy: A randomized controlled study. Physiother. Can. 2016, 68, 99ŌĆō105. [CrossRef]
Howland, R.H. Vagus Nerve Stimulation. Curr. Behav. Neurosci. Rep. 2014, 1, 64ŌĆō73. [CrossRef]
Huston, J.M.; Ochani, M.; Rosas-Ballina, M.; Liao, H.; Ochani, K.; Pavlov, V.A.; Gallowitsch-Puerta, M.; Ashok, M.; Czura,
C.J.; Foxwell, B.; et al. Splenectomy inactivates the cholinergic antiinflammatory pathway during lethal endotoxemia and
polymicrobial sepsis. J. Exp. Med. 2006, 203, 1623ŌĆō1629. [CrossRef]
Vida, G.; Pe├▒a, G.; Deitch, E.A.; Ulloa, L. ╬▒7-Cholinergic Receptor Mediates Vagal Induction of Splenic Norepinephrine. J.
Immunol. 2011, 186, 4340ŌĆō4346. [CrossRef]
Simon, T.; Panzolini, C.; Lavergne, J.; Srihar, A.; Vervoordeldonk, M.; Glaichenhaus, N.; Blancou, P. Stimulation of Splenic
Neurovascular Bundle Protect Mice from Developing Collagen-induced Arthritis-ACR Meeting Abstracts. In Proceedings of the
2019 ACR/ARP Annual Meeting, Atlanta, GA, USA, 13 November 2019.
Sigurdard├│ttir, G.A.; Nielsen, P.M.; R├Ėnager, J.; Wang, A.G. A pilot study on high amplitude low frequencyŌĆōmusic impulse
stimulation as an add-on treatment for depression. Brain Behav. 2019, 9, e01399. [CrossRef]
Braun Janzen, T.; Al Shirawi, M.I.; Rotzinger, S.; Kennedy, S.H.; Bartel, L. A Pilot Study Investigating the Effect of Music-Based
Intervention on Depression and Anhedonia. Front. Psychol. 2019, 10, 1038. [CrossRef]

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

90.

29 of 35

Julu, P.O.O.; Kerr, A.M.; Hansen, S.; Apartopoulos, F.; Jamal, G.A. Functional evidence of brain stem immaturity in Rett syndrome.
Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 1997, 6, 47ŌĆō54. [PubMed]
91. Wilfong, A.A.; Schultz, R.J. Vagus nerve stimulation for treatment of epilepsy in Rett syndrome. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 2007, 48,
683ŌĆō686. [CrossRef]
92. Adcock, K.S.; Chandler, C.; Buell, E.P.; Solorzano, B.R.; Loerwald, K.W.; Borland, M.S.; Engineer, C.T. Vagus nerve stimulation
paired with tones restores auditory processing in a rat model of Rett syndrome. Brain Stimul. 2020, 13, 1494ŌĆō1503. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
93. Bergstr├Čm-Isacsson, M.; Lagerkvist, B.; Holck, U.; Gold, C. Neurophysiological responses to music and vibroacoustic stimuli in
Rett syndrome. Res. Dev. Disabil. 2014, 35, 1281ŌĆō1291. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Zoppi, M.; Voegelin, M.R.; Signorini, M.; Zamponi, A. Pain threshold changes by skin vibratory stimulation in healthy subjects.
Acta Physiol. Scand. 1991, 143, 439ŌĆō444. [CrossRef]
95. Hollins, M.; Roy, E.A.; Crane, S.A. Vibratory antinociception: Effects of vibration amplitude and frequency. J. Pain 2003, 4, 381ŌĆō391.
[CrossRef]
96. Kakigi, R.; Shibasaki, H. Mechanisms of pain relief by vibration and movement. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 1992, 55, 282ŌĆō286.
[CrossRef]
97. Hollins, M.; McDermott, K.; Harper, D. How does vibration reduce pain? Perception 2014, 43, 70ŌĆō84. [CrossRef]
98. Cerciello, S.; Rossi, S.; Vison├Ā, E.; Corona, K.; Oliva, F. Clinical applications of vibration therapy in orthopaedic practice. Muscles.
Ligaments Tendons J. 2016, 6, 147ŌĆō156. [CrossRef]
99. Lurie, R.C.; Cimino, S.R.; Gregory, D.E.; Brown, S.H.M. The effect of short duration low back vibration on pain developed during
prolonged standing. Appl. Ergon. 2018, 67, 246ŌĆō251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Cochrane, D.J. Effectiveness of using wearable vibration therapy to alleviate muscle soreness. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2017, 117,
501ŌĆō509. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Veqar, Z.; Imtiyaz, S. Vibration Therapy in Management of Delayed Onset Muscle Soreness (DOMS). J. Clin. Diagn. Res. 2014, 8,
LE01ŌĆōLE04. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Muceli, S.; Farina, D.; Kirkesola, G.; Katch, F.; Falla, D. Reduced force steadiness in women with neck pain and the effect of short
term vibration. J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 2011, 21, 283ŌĆō290. [CrossRef]
103. Sharma, P.; Czyz, C.N.; Wulc, A.E. Investigating the Efficacy of Vibration Anesthesia to Reduce Pain from Cosmetic Botulinum
Toxin Injections. Aesthetic Surg. J. 2011, 31, 966ŌĆō971. [CrossRef]
104. Hansson, P.; Ekblom, A. Afferent stimulation induced pain relief in acute oro-facial pain and its failure to induce sufficient pain
reduction in dental and oral surgery. Pain 1984, 20, 273ŌĆō278. [CrossRef]
105. Lobre, W.D.; Callegari, B.J.; Gardner, G.; Marsh, C.M.; Bush, A.C.; Dunn, W.J. Pain control in orthodontics using a micropulse
vibration device: A randomized clinical trial. Angle Orthod. 2016, 86, 625ŌĆō630. [CrossRef]
106. Jing, D.; Xiao, J.; Li, X.; Li, Y.; Zhao, Z. The effectiveness of vibrational stimulus to accelerate orthodontic tooth movement: A
systematic review. BMC Oral Health 2017, 17, 143. [CrossRef]
107. Roy, E.A.; Hollins, M.; Maixner, W. Reduction of TMD pain by high-frequency vibration: A spatial and temporal analysis. Pain
2003, 101, 267ŌĆō274. [CrossRef]
108. National Research Council (US) Committee on Recognition and Alleviation of Pain in Laboratory Animals. Chapter 2 Mechanisms
of Pain. In Recognition and Alleviation of Pain in Laboratory Animals; National Academies Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2009.
Available online: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK32659/ (accessed on 26 March 2021).
109. Melzack, R.; Wall, P.D. Pain mechanisms: A new theory. Science 1965, 150, 971ŌĆō979. [CrossRef]
110. Moayedi, M.; Davis, K.D. Theories of pain: From specificity to gate control. J. Neurophysiol. 2013, 109, 5ŌĆō12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Mendell, L.M. Constructing and deconstructing the gate theory of pain. Pain 2014, 155, 210ŌĆō216. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Melzack, R. Pain and the neuromatrix in the brain. J. Dent. Educ. 2001, 65, 1378ŌĆō1382. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Salter, M.W.; Henry, J.L. Physiological characteristics of responses of wide dynamic range spinal neurones to cutaneously applied
vibration in the cat. Brain Res. 1990, 507, 69ŌĆō84. [CrossRef]
114. Li, Q.Q.; Shi, G.X.; Xu, Q.; Wang, J.; Liu, C.Z.; Wang, L.P. Acupuncture effect and central autonomic regulation. Evid. Based
Complement. Altern. Med. 2013, 2013, 267959. [CrossRef]
115. Xu, J.; Tany, X.; Guo, Y. Effect of somatosensory music low frequency acoustic wave on 12 main and collateral channels and
acupuncture point microcirculation on 30 cases of healthy people. JCAM 2014, 30, 8ŌĆō14.
116. Bratila, F.; Moldovan, F. Music acupuncture stimulation method-PubMed. Rom. J. Intern. Med. 2007, 45, 407ŌĆō411.
117. Weber, A.; Busbridge, S.; Governo, R. Evaluation of the Efficacy of Musical Vibroacupuncture in Pain Relief: A Randomized
Controlled Pilot Study. Neuromodul. Technol. Neural Interface 2020, ner.13281. [CrossRef]
118. Salter, M.W.; Henry, J.L. Evidence that adenosine mediates the depression of spinal dorsal horn neurons induced by peripheral
vibration in the cat. Neuroscience 1987, 22, 631ŌĆō650. [CrossRef]
119. Safarov, M.; Kerimov, S. The effect of low-frequency vibration on GABA metabolism in brain structures. Fiziol. Zhurnal 1991, 37,
3ŌĆō7.
120. Kerimov, S.; Safarov, M. Effect of vibration on gamma-aminobutyric acid metabolism in the brain in various functional conditions
of the adrenal cortex. Fiziol. Zhurnal 1992, 38, 3ŌĆō7.

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

30 of 35

121. Jamali, S.; Ross, B. Somatotopic finger mapping using MEG: Toward an optimal stimulation paradigm. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2013,
124, 1659ŌĆō1670. [CrossRef]
122. Jamali, S.; Fujioka, T.; Ross, B. Neuromagnetic beta and gamma oscillations in the somatosensory cortex after music training in
healthy older adults and a chronic stroke patient. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2014, 125, 1213ŌĆō1222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Ross, B.; Jamali, S.; Miyazaki, T.; Fujioka, T. Synchronization of beta and gamma oscillations in the somatosensory evoked
neuromagnetic steady-state response in the somatosensory system around 20 Hz. Exp. Neurol. 2013, 245, 40ŌĆō51. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
124. Bartel, L. Low frequency sound therapy. In International Dictionary of Music Therapy; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2013.
125. Maugui├©re, F.; Merlet, I.; Forss, N.; Vanni, S.; Jousm├żki, V.; Adeleine, P.; Hari, R. Activation of a distributed somatosensory cortical
network in the human brain: A dipole modelling study of magnetic fields evoked by median nerve stimulation. Part II: Effects
of stimulus rate, attention and stimulus detection. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. Evoked Potentials 1997, 104, 290ŌĆō295.
[CrossRef]
126. Maugui├©re, F.; Merlet, I.; Forss, N.; Vanni, S.; Jousm├żki, V.; Adeleine, P.; Hari, R. Activation of a distributed somatosensory cortical
network in the human brain. A dipole modelling study of magnetic fields evoked by median nerve stimulation. Part I: Location
and activation timing of SEF sources. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. Evoked Potentials 1997, 104, 281ŌĆō289. [CrossRef]
127. Bardouille, T.; Picton, T.W.; Ross, B. Attention modulates beta oscillations during prolonged tactile stimulation. Eur. J. Neurosci.
2010, 31, 761ŌĆō769. [CrossRef]
128. Patel, A. A new approach to the cognitive neuroscience of melody. In The Cognitive Neuroscience of Music; Oxford University Press:
Oxford, UK, 2012; pp. 1ŌĆō466, ISBN 9780191689314.
129. Ross, B.; Herdman, A.T.; Pantev, C. Stimulus Induced Desynchronization of Human Auditory 40-Hz Steady-State Responses. J.
Neurophysiol. 2005, 94, 4082ŌĆō4093. [CrossRef]
130. Pastor, M.A.; Artieda, J.; Arbizu, J.; Marti-Climent, J.M.; Pa├▒uelas, I.; Masdeu, J.C. Activation of human cerebral and cerebellar
cortex by auditory stimulation at 40 Hz. J. Neurosci. 2002, 22, 10501ŌĆō10506. [CrossRef]
131. Miyazaki, T.; Thompson, J.; Fujioka, T.; Ross, B. Sound envelope encoding in the auditory cortex revealed by neuromagnetic
responses in the theta to gamma frequency bands. Brain Res. 2013, 1506, 64ŌĆō75. [CrossRef]
132. Lozano, A.M.; Lipsman, N. Probing and Regulating Dysfunctional Circuits Using Deep Brain Stimulation. Neuron 2013, 77,
406ŌĆō424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Llin├Īs, R.; Ribary, U.; Jeanmonod, D.; Cancro, R.; Kronberg, E.; Schulman, J.; Zonenshayn, M.; Magnin, M.; Morel, A.; Siegmund,
M. Thalamocortical dysrhythmia I. Functional and imaging aspects. Thalamus Relat. Syst. 2001. [CrossRef]
134. Llinas, R.R.; Ribary, U.; Jeanmonod, D.; Kronberg, E.; Mitra, P.P. Thalamocortical dysrhythmia: A neurological and neuropsychiatric syndrome characterized by magnetoencephalography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1999, 96, 15222ŌĆō15227. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
135. Llinas, R.; Ribary, U. Coherent 40-Hz oscillation characterizes dream state in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1993, 90,
2078ŌĆō2081. [CrossRef]
136. Ribary, U.; Ioannides, A.A.; Singh, K.D.; Hasson, R.; Bolton, J.P.R.; Lado, F.; Mogilner, A.; Llin├Īs, R. Magnetic field tomography of
coherent thalamocortical 40-Hz oscillations in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1991, 88, 11037ŌĆō11041. [CrossRef]
137. Llin├Īs, R.; Urbano, F.J.; Leznik, E.; Ram├Łrez, R.R.; Van Marle, H.J.F. Rhythmic and dysrhythmic thalamocortical dynamics: GABA
systems and the edge effect. Trends Neurosci. 2005, 28, 325ŌĆō333. [CrossRef]
138. Fallon, N.; Chiu, Y.; Nurmikko, T.; Stancak, A. Altered theta oscillations in resting EEG of fibromyalgia syndrome patients. Eur. J.
Pain 2018, 22, 49ŌĆō57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Jensen, K.B.; Loitoile, R.; Kosek, E.; Petzke, F.; Carville, S.; Fransson, P.; Marcus, H.; Williams, S.C.R.; Choy, E.; Mainguy, Y.; et al.
Patients with fibromyalgia display less functional connectivity in the brainŌĆÖs pain inhibitory network. Mol. Pain 2012, 8, 32.
[CrossRef]
140. Braun Janzen, T.; Paneduro, D.; Picard, L.; Gordon, A.; Bartel, L.R. A parallel randomized controlled trial examining the effects of
rhythmic sensory stimulation on fibromyalgia symptoms. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0212021. [CrossRef]
141. Dockstader, C.; Wang, F.; Bouffet, E.; Mabbott, D.J. Gamma deficits as a neural signature of cognitive impairment in children
treated for brain tumors. J. Neurosci. 2014, 34, 8813ŌĆō8824. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Stam, C.J.; Van Cappellen van Walsum, A.M.; Pijnenburg, Y.A.L.; Berendse, H.W.; De Munck, J.C.; Scheltens, P.; Van Dijk, B.W.
Generalized synchronization of MEG recordings in AlzheimerŌĆÖs disease: Evidence for involvement of the gamma band. J. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 2002, 19, 562ŌĆō574. [CrossRef]
143. Martorell, A.J.; Paulson, A.L.; Suk, H.J.; Abdurrob, F.; Drummond, G.T.; Guan, W.; Young, J.Z.; Kim, D.N.W.; Kritskiy, O.;
Barker, S.J.; et al. Multi-sensory Gamma Stimulation Ameliorates AlzheimerŌĆÖs-Associated Pathology and Improves Cognition.
Cell 2019, 177, 256ŌĆō271.e22. [CrossRef]
144. Wilson, C. Can Listening to a Low Hum Destroy AlzheimerŌĆÖs Brain Plaques?|New Scientist. Available online: https:
//www.newscientist.com/article/mg23731593-300-can-listening-to-a-low-hum-destroy-alzheimers-brain-plaques/?utm_
campaign=RSS%257CNSNS&utm_source=NSNS&%25 (accessed on 26 March 2021).
145. Weaver, C. Brain-Wave Treatment for AlzheimerŌĆÖs Is Promising, but the First Human Subject Is Left Behind|Salon.com. Available
online: https://www.salon.com/2017/12/13/brain-wave-treatment-for-alzheimers-is-promising-but-the-first-human-subjectis-left-behind_partner/ (accessed on 26 March 2021).

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

31 of 35

146. Neumann, W.J.; Schroll, H.; De Almeida Marcelino, A.L.; Horn, A.; Ewert, S.; Irmen, F.; Krause, P.; Schneider, G.H.; Hamker,
F.; K├╝hn, A.A. Functional segregation of basal ganglia pathways in ParkinsonŌĆÖs disease. Brain 2018, 141, 2655ŌĆō2669. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
147. Desmoulin, G.T.; Szostek, J.S.; Khan, A.H.; Al-Ameri, O.S.; Hunter, C.J.; Bogduk, N. Spinal intervention efficacy on correcting
cervical vertebral axes of rotation and the resulting improvements in pain, disability and psychsocial measures. J. Musculoskelet.
Pain 2012, 20, 31ŌĆō40. [CrossRef]
148. Susan Rotzinger, B.; Kennedy, S.; Lam, R.W.; Kennedy, S.H.; Beaulieu, S.; Montr├®al Glenda MacQueen, F.; Calgary Diane McIntosh,
F.; Vancouver Arun Ravindran, F.V.; Toronto, F. The Canadian Biomarker Integration Network for Depression (CAN-BIND): Looking
Deeper into Major Depressive Disorder; CANMAT: Toronto, ON, Canada, 2019.
149. Smit, D.J.A.; Posthuma, D.; Boomsma, D.I.; De Geus, E.J.C. The relation between frontal EEG asymmetry and the risk for anxiety
and depression. Biol. Psychol. 2007, 74, 26ŌĆō33. [CrossRef]
150. van der Vinne, N.; Vollebregt, M.A.; van Putten, M.J.A.M.; Arns, M. Frontal alpha asymmetry as a diagnostic marker in depression:
Fact or fiction? A meta-analysis. NeuroImage Clin. 2017, 16, 79ŌĆō87. [CrossRef]
151. Field, T.; Martinez, A.; Nawrocki, T.; Pickens, J.; Fox, N.; Schanberg, S. Music shifts frontal EEG in depressed adolescents. Clin.
Trial 1998, 33, 109ŌĆō116.
152. Jones, N.A.; Field, T. Massage and music therapies attenuate frontal EEG asymmetry in depressed adolescents. Adolescence 1999,
34, 529ŌĆō534.
153. Petchkovsky, L.; Robertson-Gillam, K.; Kropotov, J.; Petchkovsky, M. Using QEEG parameters (asymmetry, coherence, and P3a
novelty response) to track improvement in depression after choir therapy. Adv. Ment. Health 2013, 11, 257ŌĆō267. [CrossRef]
154. Wilcock, I.; Whatman, C.; Harris, N.; Keogh, J. Vibration training: Could it enhance the strength, power, or speed of athletes? J.
Strength Cond. Res. 2009, 23, 593ŌĆō603.
155. Ceccarelli, G.; Benedetti, L.; Galli, D.; Pr├©, D.; Silvani, G.; Crosetto, N.; Magenes, G.; Cusella De Angelis, M.G. Low-amplitude
high frequency vibration down-regulates myostatin and atrogin-1 expression, two components of the atrophy pathway in muscle
cells. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 2014, 8, 396ŌĆō406. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Schiaffino, S.; Dyar, K.A.; Ciciliot, S.; Blaauw, B.; Sandri, M. Mechanisms regulating skeletal muscle growth and atrophy. FEBS J.
2013, 280, 4294ŌĆō4314. [CrossRef]
157. Corbiere, T.F.; Koh, T.J. Local low-intensity vibration improves healing of muscle injury in mice. Physiol. Rep. 2020, 8, e14356.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Lee, S.J.; McPherron, A.C. Regulation of myostatin activity and muscle growth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2001, 98, 9306ŌĆō9311.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Gomes, M.D.; Lecker, S.H.; Jagoe, R.T.; Navon, A.; Goldberg, A.L. Atrogin-1, a muscle-specific F-box protein highly expressed
during muscle atrophy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2001, 98, 14440ŌĆō14445. [CrossRef]
160. L├®ger, B.; Cartoni, R.; Praz, M.; Lamon, S.; D├®riaz, O.; Crettenand, A.; Gobelet, C.; Rohmer, P.; Konzelmann, M.; Luthi, F.; et al.
Akt signalling through GSK-3╬▓, mTOR and Foxo1 is involved in human skeletal muscle hypertrophy and atrophy. J. Physiol.
2006, 576, 923ŌĆō933. [CrossRef]
161. Sandri, M.; Sandri, C.; Gilbert, A.; Skurk, C.; Calabria, E.; Picard, A.; Walsh, K.; Schiaffino, S.; Lecker, S.H.; Goldberg, A.L. Foxo
transcription factors induce the atrophy-related ubiquitin ligase atrogin-1 and cause skeletal muscle atrophy. Cell 2004, 117,
399ŌĆō412. [CrossRef]
162. Ren, Z.; Lan, Q.; Chen, Y.; Chan, Y.W.J.; Mahady, G.; Lee, S.M.-Y. Low-Magnitude High-Frequency Vibration Decreases Body
Weight Gain and Increases Muscle Strength by Enhancing the p38 and AMPK Pathways in db/db Mice. Diabetes Metab. Syndr.
Obes. Targets Ther. 2020, 13, 979ŌĆō989. [CrossRef]
163. Kosar, A.C.; Candow, D.G.; Putland, J.T. Potential beneficial effects of whole-body vibration formuscle recovery after exercise. J.
Strength Cond. Res. 2012, 26, 2907ŌĆō2911. [CrossRef]
164. Lin, W.C.; Lee, C.L.; Chang, N.J. Acute effects of dynamic stretching followed by vibration foam rolling on sports performance of
badminton athletes. J. Sport. Sci. Med. 2020, 19, 420ŌĆō428.
165. Ostrowski, K.; Rohde, T.; Asp, S.; Schjerling, P.; Pedersen, B.K. Pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine balance in strenuous exercise
in humans. J. Physiol. 1999, 515, 287ŌĆō291. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
166. Olfert, I.M.; Malek, M.H.; Eagan, T.M.L.; Wagner, H.; Wagner, P.D. Inflammatory cytokine response to exercise in alpha-1antitrypsin deficient COPD patients ŌĆ£onŌĆØ or ŌĆ£offŌĆØ augmentation therapy. BMC Pulm. Med. 2014, 14, 106. [CrossRef]
167. Brown, W.M.C.; Davison, G.W.; McClean, C.M.; Murphy, M.H. A Systematic Review of the Acute Effects of Exercise on Immune
and Inflammatory Indices in Untrained Adults. Sport. Med. Open 2015, 1, 35. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
168. Lage, V.K.S.; Lacerda, A.C.R.; Neves, C.D.C.; Chaves, M.G.A.; Soares, A.A.; Lima, L.P.; Martins, J.B.; Matos, M.A.; Vieira, ├ē.L.M.;
Teixeira, A.L.; et al. Acute Effects of Whole-Body Vibration on Inflammatory Markers in People with Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease: A Pilot Study. Rehabil. Res. Pract. 2018, 2018, 5480214. [CrossRef]
169. Gloeckl, R.; Heinzelmann, I.; Baeuerle, S.; Damm, E.; Schwedhelm, A.L.; Diril, M.; Buhrow, D.; Jerrentrup, A.; Kenn, K. Effects of
whole body vibration in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease-A randomized controlled trial. Respir. Med. 2012,
106, 75ŌĆō83. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
170. Christie, J. Progressive resistance strength training for improving physical function in older adults. Int. J. Older People Nurs. 2011,
6, 244ŌĆō246. [CrossRef]

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

32 of 35

171. Mayer, F.; Scharhag-Rosenberger, F.; Carlsohn, A.; Cassel, M.; M├╝ller, S.; Scharhag, J. The Intensity and Effects of Strength Training
in the Elderly. Dtsch. Aerzteblatt Online 2011, 108, 359ŌĆō364. [CrossRef]
172. Zhang, L.; Weng, C.; Liu, M.; Wang, Q.; Liu, L.; He, Y. Effect of whole-body vibration exercise on mobility, balance ability and
general health status in frail elderly patients: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Clin. Rehabil. 2014, 28, 59ŌĆō68. [CrossRef]
173. Wu, S.; Ning, H.T.; Xiao, S.M.; Hu, M.Y.; Wu, X.Y.; Deng, H.W.; Feng, H. Effects of vibration therapy on muscle mass, muscle
strength and physical function in older adults with sarcopenia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur. Rev. Aging Phys. Act.
2020, 17, 14. [CrossRef]
174. Wadsworth, D.; Lark, S. Effects of Whole-Body Vibration Training on the Physical Function of the Frail Elderly: An Open,
Randomized Controlled Trial. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2020, 101, 1111ŌĆō1119. [CrossRef]
175. Bushby, K.; Finkel, R.; Birnkrant, D.J.; Case, L.E.; Clemens, P.R.; Cripe, L.; Kaul, A.; Kinnett, K.; McDonald, C.; Pandya, S.; et al.
Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, part 2: Implementation of multidisciplinary care. Lancet Neurol.
2010, 9, 177ŌĆō189. [CrossRef]
176. Moreira-Marconi, E.; S├Ī-Caputo, D.C.; Dionello, C.F.; Guedes-Aguiar, E.O.; Sousa-Gon├¦alves, C.R.; Morel, D.S.; PaineirasDomingos, L.L.; Souza, P.L.; K├╝tter, C.R.; Costa-Cavalcanti, R.G.; et al. Whole-body vibration exercise is well tolerated in patients
with duchenne muscular dystrophy: A systematic review. Afr. J. Tradit. Complement. Altern. Med. 2017, 14, 2ŌĆō10. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
177. Chen, B.; Lin, T.; Yang, X.; Li, Y.; Xie, D.; Zheng, W.; Cui, H.; Deng, W.; Tan, X. Low-magnitude, high-frequency vibration promotes
the adhesion and the osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells cultured on a hydroxyapatitecoated surface: The direct role of Wnt/catenin signaling pathway activation. Int. J. Mol. Med. 2016, 38, 1531ŌĆō1540. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
178. Zhou, Y.; Guan, X.; Zhu, Z.; Gao, S.; Zhang, C.; Li, C.; Zhou, K.; Hou, W.; Yu, H. Osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stromal cells on bone-derived scaffolds: Effect of microvibration and role of erk1/2 activation. Eur. Cells Mater.
2011, 22, 12ŌĆō25. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
179. Zhang, C.; Li, J.; Zhang, L.; Zhou, Y.; Hou, W.; Quan, H.; Li, X.; Chen, Y.; Yu, H. Effects of mechanical vibration on proliferation
and osteogenic differentiation of human periodontal ligament stem cells. Arch. Oral Biol. 2012, 57, 1395ŌĆō1407. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
180. Pr├©, D.; Ceccarelli, G.; Visai, L.; Benedetti, L.; Imbriani, M.; Cusella De Angelis, M.G.; Magenes, G. High-frequency vibration
treatment of human bone marrow stromal cells increases differentiation toward bone tissue. Bone Marrow Res. 2013, 2013, 803450.
[CrossRef]
181. Marie, P.J. Transcription factors controlling osteoblastogenesis. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2008, 473, 98ŌĆō105. [CrossRef]
182. Nakashima, K.; De Crombrugghe, B. Transcriptional mechanisms in osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. Trends Genet.
2003, 19, 458ŌĆō466. [CrossRef]
183. Owen, T.A.; Aronow, M.; Shalhoub, V.; Barone, L.M.; Wilming, L.; Tassinari, M.S.; Kennedy, M.B.; Pockwinse, S.; Lian, J.B.; Stein,
G.S. Progressive development of the rat osteoblast phenotype in vitro: Reciprocal relationships in expression of genes associated
with osteoblast proliferation and differentiation during formation of the bone extracellular matrix. J. Cell. Physiol. 1990, 143,
420ŌĆō430. [CrossRef]
184. Komori, T. Regulation of osteoblast differentiation by transcription factors. J. Cell. Biochem. 2006, 99, 1233ŌĆō1239. [CrossRef]
185. Karsenty, G.; Wagner, E.F. Reaching a genetic and molecular understanding of skeletal development. Dev. Cell 2002, 2, 389ŌĆō406.
[CrossRef]
186. Komori, T.; Yagi, H.; Nomura, S.; Yamaguchi, A.; Sasaki, K.; Deguchi, K.; Shimizu, Y.; Bronson, R.T.; Gao, Y.H.; Inada, M.; et al.
Targeted disruption of Cbfa1 results in a complete lack of bone formation owing to maturational arrest of osteoblasts. Cell 1997,
89, 755ŌĆō764. [CrossRef]
187. Uzer, G.; Pongkitwitoon, S.; Ete Chan, M.; Judex, S. Vibration induced osteogenic commitment of mesenchymal stem cells is
enhanced by cytoskeletal remodeling but not fluid shear. J. Biomech. 2013, 46, 2296ŌĆō2302. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Lu, Y.; Zhao, Q.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, L.; Li, D.; Zhu, Z.; Gan, X.; Yu, H. Vibration loading promotes osteogenic differentiation of bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells via p38 MAPK signaling pathway. J. Biomech. 2018, 71, 67ŌĆō75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
189. Wu, J.; Wu, Y.; Chen, X.; Zhi, W. Early stage mechanical adaptability and osteogenic differentiation of mouse bone marrow
derived mesenchymal stem cell under micro-vibration stimulation environment. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi 2020,
37, 96ŌĆō104.
190. Winslow, M.M.; Pan, M.; Starbuck, M.; Gallo, E.M.; Deng, L.; Karsenty, G.; Crabtree, G.R. Calcineurin/NFAT Signaling in
Osteoblasts Regulates Bone Mass. Dev. Cell 2006, 10, 771ŌĆō782. [CrossRef]
191. Robinson, J.A.; Chatterjee-Kishore, M.; Yaworsky, P.J.; Cullen, D.M.; Zhao, W.; Li, C.; Kharode, Y.; Sauter, L.; Babij, P.;
Brown, E.L.; et al. Wnt/╬▓-catenin signaling is a normal physiological response to mechanical loading in bone. J. Biol. Chem. 2006,
281, 31720ŌĆō31728. [CrossRef]
192. Hou, W.W.; Zhu, Z.L.; Zhou, Y.; Zhang, C.X.; Yu, H.Y. Involvement of Wnt activation in the micromechanical vibration-enhanced
osteogenic response of osteoblasts. J. Orthop. Sci. 2011, 16, 598ŌĆō605. [CrossRef]
193. Rodr├Łguez-Carballo, E.; G├Īmez, B.; Ventura, F. p38 MAPK signaling in osteoblast differentiation. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2016, 4, 40.
[CrossRef]

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

33 of 35

194. Dougall, W.C. Molecular pathways: Osteoclast-dependent and osteoclast-independent roles of the RANKL/RANK/OPG
pathway in tumorigenesis and metastasis. Clin. Cancer Res. 2012, 18, 326ŌĆō335. [CrossRef]
195. Kulkarni, R.N.; Voglewede, P.A.; Liu, D. Mechanical vibration inhibits osteoclast formation by reducing DC-STAMP receptor
expression in osteoclast precursor cells. Bone 2013, 57, 493ŌĆō498. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
196. Wu, S.H.; Zhong, Z.M.; Chen, J.T. Low-magnitude high-frequency vibration inhibits RANKL-induced osteoclast differentiation of
RAW264.7 cells. Int. J. Med. Sci. 2012, 9, 801ŌĆō807. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
197. Sun, C.; Zhao, W.; He, S.; Fang, X.; Mi, L.; DU, G.; Zhang, L.; Sun, X. Patterns of osteoprotegerin or nuclear factor kappa B
ligand gene expression in the treatment of bone defect with bone marrow stem cell transplantation and low-frequency vibration.
Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi 2011, 91, 920ŌĆō924.
198. Kim, I.S.; Song, Y.M.; Lee, B.; Hwang, S.J. Human mesenchymal stromal cells are mechanosensitive to vibration stimuli. J. Dent.
Res. 2012, 91, 1135ŌĆō1140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
199. Puleo, D.A.; Nanci, A. Understanding and controlling the bone-implant interface. Biomaterials 1999, 20, 2311ŌĆō2321. [CrossRef]
200. Olivares-Navarrete, R.; Hyzy, S.L.; Hutton, D.L.; Erdman, C.P.; Wieland, M.; Boyan, B.D.; Schwartz, Z. Direct and indirect effects
of microstructured titanium substrates on the induction of mesenchymal stem cell differentiation towards the osteoblast lineage.
Biomaterials 2010, 31, 2728ŌĆō2735. [CrossRef]
201. Dumas, V.; Ducharne, B.; Perrier, A.; Fournier, C.; Guignandon, A.; Thomas, M.; Peyroche, S.; Guyomar, D.; Vico, L.; Rattner,
A. Extracellular matrix produced by osteoblasts cultured under low-magnitude, high-frequency stimulation is favourable to
osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. Calcif. Tissue Int. 2010, 87, 351ŌĆō364. [CrossRef]
202. Di Palma, F.; Chamson, A.; Lafage-Proust, M.H.; Jouffray, P.; Sabido, O.; Peyroche, S.; Vico, L.; Rattner, A. Physiological strains
remodel extracellular matrix and cell-cell adhesion in osteoblastic cells cultured on alumina-coated titanium alloy. Biomaterials
2004, 25, 2565ŌĆō2575. [CrossRef]
203. Sato, K.; Adachi, T.; Matsuo, M.; Tomita, Y. Quantitative evaluation of threshold fiber strain that induces reorganization of
cytoskeletal actin fiber structure in osteoblastic cells. J. Biomech. 2005, 38, 1895ŌĆō1901. [CrossRef]
204. Carvalho, R.S.; Elliot Scott, J.; Yen, E.H.K. The effects of mechanical stimulation on the distribution of ╬▓1 integrin and expression
of ╬▓1-integrin mRNA in TE-85 human osteosarcoma cells. Arch. Oral Biol. 1995, 40, 257ŌĆō264. [CrossRef]
205. Kular, J.; Tickner, J.; Chim, S.M.; Xu, J. An overview of the regulation of bone remodelling at the cellular level. Clin. Biochem. 2012,
45, 863ŌĆō873. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
206. Lau, E.; Al-Dujaili, S.; Guenther, A.; Liu, D.; Wang, L.; You, L. Effect of low-magnitude, high-frequency vibration on osteocytes in
the regulation of osteoclasts. Bone 2010, 46, 1508ŌĆō1515. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
207. Rubin, C.T.; Sommerfeldt, D.W.; Judex, S.; Qin, Y.X. Inhibition of osteopenia by low magnitude, high-frequency mechanical
stimuli. Drug Discov. Today 2001, 6, 848ŌĆō858. [CrossRef]
208. Bacabac, R.G.; Smit, T.H.; Van Loon, J.J.W.A.; Doulabi, B.Z.; Helder, M.; Klein-Nulend, J. Bone cell responses to high-frequency
vibration stress: Does the nucleus oscillate within the cytoplasm? FASEB J. 2006, 20, 858ŌĆō864. [CrossRef]
209. Mancini, L.; Moradi-Bidhendi, N.; Brandi, M.L.; MacIntyre, I. Nitric oxide superoxide and peroxynitrite modulate osteoclast
activity. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1998, 243, 785ŌĆō790. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
210. Jing, D.; Luo, E.; Cai, J.; Tong, S.; Zhai, M.; Shen, G.; Wang, X.; Luo, Z. Mechanical Vibration Mitigates the Decrease of Bone
Quantity and Bone Quality of Leptin Receptor-Deficient Db/Db Mice by Promoting Bone Formation and Inhibiting Bone
Resorption. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2016, 31, 1713ŌĆō1724. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
211. Li, M.; Wu, W.; Tan, L.; Mu, D.; Zhu, D.; Wang, J.; Zhao, B. Low-magnitude mechanical vibration regulates expression of
osteogenic proteins in ovariectomized rats. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2015, 465, 344ŌĆō348. [CrossRef]
212. Sun, T.; Yan, Z.; Cai, J.; Shao, X.; Wang, D.; Ding, Y.; Feng, Y.; Yang, J.; Luo, E.; Feng, X.; et al. Effects of mechanical vibration on
cell morphology, proliferation, apoptosis, and cytokine expression/secretion in osteocyte-like MLO-Y4 cells exposed to high
glucose. Cell Biol. Int. 2020, 44, 216ŌĆō228. [CrossRef]
213. Tanaka, S.M.; Li, J.; Duncan, R.L.; Yokota, H.; Burr, D.B.; Turner, C.H. Effects of broad frequency vibration on cultured osteoblasts.
J. Biomech. 2003, 36, 73ŌĆō80. [CrossRef]
214. Chung, S.L.; Leung, K.S.; Cheung, W.H. Low-magnitude high-frequency vibration enhances gene expression related to callus
formation, mineralization and remodeling during osteoporotic fracture healing in rats. J. Orthop. Res. 2014, 32, 1572ŌĆō1579.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
215. Yokoi, H.; Take, Y.; Uchida, R.; Magome, T.; Shimomura, K.; Mae, T.; Okamoto, T.; Hanai, T.; Chong, Y.; Sato, S.; et al. Vibration
acceleration promotes endochondral formation during fracture healing through cellular chondrogenic differentiation. PLoS ONE
2020, 15, e0229127. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
216. Wehrle, E.; Liedert, A.; Heilmann, A.; Wehner, T.; Bindl, R.; Fischer, L.; Haffner-Luntzer, M.; Jakob, F.; Schinke, T.; Amling, M.; et al.
The impact of low-magnitude high-frequency vibration on Fracture healing is profoundly influenced by the oestrogen status in
mice. DMM Dis. Model. Mech. 2015, 8, 93ŌĆō104. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
217. Donahue, S.W.; Jacobs, C.R.; Donahue, H.J. Flow-induced calcium oscillations in rat osteoblasts are age, loading frequency, and
shear stress dependent. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2001, 281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
218. Li, Y.H.; Zhu, D.; Cao, Z.; Liu, Y.; Sun, J.; Tan, L. Primary cilia respond to intermittent low-magnitude, high-frequency vibration
and mediate vibration-induced effects in osteoblasts. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2020, 318, C73ŌĆōC82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

34 of 35

219. Pravitharangul, A.; Suttapreyasri, S.; Leethanakul, C. Iliac and mandible osteoblasts exhibit varied responses to LMHF vibration.
Cell Biol. Int. 2018, 42, 1349ŌĆō1357. [CrossRef]
220. Rubin, C.T.; Recker, R.; Cullen, D.; Ryaby, J.; McCabe, J.; McLeod, K. Prevention of postmenopausal bone loss by a low-magnitude,
high-frequency mechanical stimuli: A clinical trial assessing compliance, efficacy, and safety. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2004, 19, 343ŌĆō351.
[CrossRef]
221. Komrakova, M.; Sehmisch, S.; Tezval, M.; Ammon, J.; Lieberwirth, P.; Sauerhoff, C.; Trautmann, L.; Wicke, M.; Dullin, C.;
Stuermer, K.M.; et al. Identification of a vibration regime favorable for bone healing and muscle in estrogen-deficient rats. Calcif.
Tissue Int. 2013, 92, 509ŌĆō520. [CrossRef]
222. Haffner-Luntzer, M.; Lackner, I.; Liedert, A.; Fischer, V.; Ignatius, A. Effects of low-magnitude high-frequency vibration on
osteoblasts are dependent on estrogen receptor ╬▒ signaling and cytoskeletal remodeling. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2018,
503, 2678ŌĆō2684. [CrossRef]
223. ElDeeb, A.M.; Abdel-Aziem, A.A. Effect of Whole-Body Vibration Exercise on Power Profile and Bone Mineral Density in
Postmenopausal Women with Osteoporosis: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J. Manip. Physiol. Ther. 2020, 43, 384ŌĆō393. [CrossRef]
224. Verschueren, S.M.; Roelants, M.; Delecluse, C.; Swinnen, S.; Vanderschueren, D.; Boonen, S. Effect of 6-Month Whole Body
Vibration Training on Hip Density, Muscle Strength, and Postural Control in Postmenopausal Women: A Randomized Controlled
Pilot Study. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2003, 19, 352ŌĆō359. [CrossRef]
225. Turner, S.; Torode, M.; Climstein, M.; Naughton, G.; Greene, D.; Baker, M.K.; Fiatarone Singh, M.A. A Randomized Controlled Trial
of Whole Body Vibration Exposure on Markers of Bone Turnover in Postmenopausal Women. J. Osteoporos. 2011, 2011, 710387.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
226. Matute-Llorente, A.; Gonz├Īlez-Ag├╝ero, A.; G├│mez-Cabello, A.; Olmedillas, H.; Vicente-Rodr├Łguez, G.; Casaj├║s, J.A. Effect of
whole body vibration training on bone mineral density and bone quality in adolescents with Down syndrome: A randomized
controlled trial. Osteoporos. Int. 2015, 26, 2449ŌĆō2459. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
227. Ward, K.; Alsop, C.; Caulton, J.; Rubin, C.; Adams, J.; Mughal, Z. Low Magnitude Mechanical Loading Is Osteogenic in Children
With Disabling Conditions. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2004, 19, 360ŌĆō369. [CrossRef]
228. Griffin, M.J. Predicting the hazards of whole-body vibration-Considerations of a standard. Ind. Health 1998, 36, 83ŌĆō91. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
229. Baliga, S.; Treon, K.; Craig, N.J.A. Low back pain: Current surgical approaches. Asian Spine J. 2015, 9, 645ŌĆō657. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
230. Desmoulin, G.T.; Enns-Bray, W.S.; Hewitt, C.R.; Hunter, C.J. Multi-unit sustained vibration loading platform for biological tissues:
Design, validation and experimentation. J. Biomech. 2013, 46, 116ŌĆō121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
231. Desmoulin, G.T.; Hewitt, C.R.; Hunter, C.J. Disc strain and resulting positive mRNA expression from application of a noninvasive
treatment. Spine 2011, 36, E921ŌĆōE928. [CrossRef]
232. Desmoulin, G.T.; Reno, C.R.; Hunter, C.J. Free axial vibrations at 0 to 200 Hz positively affect extracellular matrix messenger
ribonucleic acid expression in bovine nucleus pulposi. Spine 2010, 35, 1437ŌĆō1444. [CrossRef]
233. McCann, M.R.; Patel, P.; Beaucage, K.L.; Xiao, Y.; Bacher, C.; Siqueira, W.L.; Holdsworth, D.W.; Dixon, S.J.; S├®guin, C.A. Acute
vibration induces transient expression of anabolic genes in the Murine intervertebral disc. Arthritis Rheum. 2013, 65, 1853ŌĆō1864.
[CrossRef]
234. Liang, X.; Shen, H.; Shi, W.D.; Ren, S.; Jiang, W.; Liu, H.; Yang, P.; Sun, Z.Y.; Lin, J.; Yang, H.L. Effect of axial vertical vibration on
degeneration of lumbar intervertebral discs in modified bipedal rats: An in-vivo study. Asian Pac. J. Trop. Med. 2017, 10, 714ŌĆō717.
[CrossRef]
235. Freemont, A.J. The cellular pathobiology of the degenerate intervertebral disc and discogenic back pain. Rheumatology 2008, 48,
5ŌĆō10. [CrossRef]
236. Esmaeili, M.; Berry, M.; Logan, A.; Ahmed, Z. Decorin treatment of spinal cord injury. Neural Regen. Res. 2014, 9, 1653ŌĆō1656.
[PubMed]
237. Fardon, D.F.; Milette, P.C. Combined Task Forces of the North American Spine Society, American Society of Spine Radiology,
and American Society of Neuroradiology Nomenclature and Classification of Lumbar Disc Pathology. Spine 2001, 26, E93ŌĆōE113.
[CrossRef]
238. Solovieva, S.; Lohiniva, J.; Leino-Arjas, P.; Raininko, R.; Luoma, K.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Riihim├żki, H. COL9A3 Gene Polymorphism
and Obesity in Intervertebral Disc Degeneration of the Lumbar Spine: Evidence of Gene-Environment Interaction. Spine 2002, 27,
2691ŌĆō2696. [CrossRef]
239. Videman, T.; Batti├®, M.C.; Gill, K.; Manninen, H.; Gibbons, L.E.; Fisher, L.D. Magnetic Resonance Imaging Findings and Their
Relationships in the Thoracic and Lumbar Spine. Spine 1995, 20, 928ŌĆō935. [CrossRef]
240. Brown, M.F.; Hukkanen, M.V.; McCarthy, I.D.; Redfern, D.R.; Batten, J.J.; Crock, H.V.; Hughes, S.P.; Polak, J.M. Sensory and
sympathetic innervation of the vertebral endplate in patients with degenerative disc disease. J. Bone Jt. Surg. Br. 1997, 79, 147ŌĆō153.
[CrossRef]
241. Burke, J.G.; Watson, R.W.G.; McCormack, D.; Dowling, F.E.; Walsh, M.G.; Fitzpatrick, J.M. Intervertebral discs which cause low
back pain secrete high levels of proinflammatory mediators. J. Bone Jt. Surg. Br. 2002, 84, 196ŌĆō201. [CrossRef]
242. Risbud, M.V.; Shapiro, I.M. Role of cytokines in intervertebral disc degeneration: Pain and disc content. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 2014,
10, 44ŌĆō56. [CrossRef]

Healthcare 2021, 9, 597

35 of 35

243. Tardy-Gervet, M.F.; Guieu, R.; Ribot-Ciscar, E.; Roll, J. Transcutaneous mechanical vibrations: Analgesic effect and antinociceptive
mechanisms. Rev. Neurol. 1993, 149, 177ŌĆō185.
244. Desmoulin, G.T.; Yasin, N.I.; Chen, D.W. Spinal mechanisms of pain control. Clin. J. Pain 2007, 23, 576ŌĆō585. [CrossRef]
245. Keller, T.S.; Colloca, C.J.; Fuhr, A.W. In vivo transient vibration assessment of the normal human thoracolumbar spine. J. Manip.
Physiol. Ther. 2000, 23, 521ŌĆō530. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
246. Smith, A.; OŌĆÖSullivan, P.; Straker, L. Classification of Sagittal Thoraco-Lumbo-Pelvic Alignment of the Adolescent Spine in
Standing and Its Relationship to Low Back Pain. Spine 2008, 33, 2101ŌĆō2107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
247. Lim, E.; Lim, R.; Suhaimi, A.; Chan, B.T.; Wahab, A.K.A. Treatment of chronic back pain using indirect vibroacoustic therapy: A
pilot study. J. Back Musculoskelet. Rehabil. 2018, 31, 1041ŌĆō1047. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

