Schumann Resonances, a plausible
biophysical mechanism for the human health
effects of Solar/Geomagnetic Activity

Dr Neil Cherry
Associate Professor of Environmental Health

6th September 2002

Neil.Cherry@ecan.govt.nz
© Dr Neil Cherry 2002-2005

Human Sciences Department
P.O. Box 84
Lincoln University
Canterbury, New Zealand

Schumann Resonances, a plausible biophysical mechanism
for the human health effects of Solar/Geomagnetic Activity
Neil Cherry
Human Sciences Department
Lincoln University
New Zealand
2/3/2001, updated 6/9/02
Abstract
A large number of studies have identified significant physical, biological and health
effects associated with changes in Solar and Geomagnetic Activity (S-GMA).
Variations in solar activity, geomagnetic activity and ionospheric ion/electron
concentrations are all mutually highly correlated and strongly linked by geophysical
processes. A key scientific question is, what factor is it in the natural environment
that causes the observed biological and physical effects? The effects include
altered blood pressure and melatonin, increased cancer, reproductive, cardiac and
neurological disease and death. Many occupational studies have found that
exposure to ELF fields between 16.7 Hz and 50/60 Hz significantly reduces
melatonin. They are also associated with the same and very similar health effects as
the S-GMA effects. The cell membrane has an electric field of the order of 105 V/cm.
The ELF brain waves, the EEG, operates at about 10-1 V/cm. Fish, birds, animals and
people have been shown to respond to ELF signals that produce tissue electric
gradients of ULF/ELF oscillating signals at a threshold of 10-7 to 10-8 V/cm. This
involves non-linear resonant absorption of ULF/ELF oscillating signals into systems
that use natural ion oscillation signals in the same frequency range. A long-lived,
globally available natural ULF/ELF signal, the Schumann Resonance signal, was
investigated as the possible plausible biophysical mechanism for the observed SGMA effects. It is found that the Schumann Resonance signal is extremely highly
correlated with S-GMA indices of sunspot number and the Kp index. The physical
mechanism is the ionospheric D-region ion/electron density that varies with S-GMA
and forms the upper boundary of the resonant cavity in which the Schumann
Resonance signal is formed. This provides strong support for identifying the
Schumann Resonance signals as the S-GMA biophysical mechanism, primarily
through a melatonin mechanism. It strongly supports the classification of S-GMA as
a natural hazard.
Introduction:
The idea that spots on the sun or solar flares might influence human health on earth at
first appears to lack scientific credibility. However, when significant correlations between
hospital admissions and health registers and Solar-Geomagnetic Activity (S-GMA) are
found, then the challenge is to conceive of and to document a scientifically plausible and
observationally supported mechanism and model. There is a large body of research
correlating S-GMA with biological effects and human health effects. There is currently an
absence of a known and credible biophysical mechanism to link the S-GMA with these
effects. The hypothesis promoted here is that the Schumann Resonance (SR) signal is the
plausible biophysical mechanism to link the S-GMA levels to biological and human health

2
effects. This operates by being resonantly absorbed by brain systems and altering the
serotonin/melatonin balance. Confirmation of this hypothesis will strengthen the proposal
the S-GMA is a natural hazard for humans, animals and other species.
This study is in a context of fundamental biological concepts relating to homeostasis and
adaptation. On one hand the survival of organisms in changing environments requires
adaptation. On the other hand mammals have very advanced neurological and
physiological systems that must be maintained within narrow activity ranges because of
homeostatic requirements. Homeostasis is partly maintained in variable environments,
such as daily climate cycles, through the use of external reference signals called
Zeitgebers (time givers). The daily solar cycle is detected by mammal's eyes and brains.
This induces a diurnal cycle of endocrine hormones that regulate a whole body system of
diurnal changes. Isolating people or birds from the daily solar/climate signals leads to a
significant lengthening of the circadian period, Wever (1973, 1974). Wever also showed
that there is a natural ULF/ELF electromagnetic signal that also acts as a circadian
Zeitgeber. The characteristics of this signal are contained in the Schumann Resonance
signal and there is no other known natural signal with the appropriate characteristics.
Schumann Resonance Signal:
The SR phenomenon was first conceived and proposed by German physicist Dr W.O.
Schumann, Schumann (1952). The existence of the signals was confirmed by
measurements in the mid-1950's, Schumann and König (1954), Polk (1982). The SR
signal is a globally available ULF/ELF signal that has been generated since the
ionosphere was formed and thunderstorms have existed. Hence they pre-date animal
evolution on earth. The SR signal was investigated for this purpose because of its strong
similarity to the human EEG spectrum and evidence that environmental signals of the
same frequency range do interact with brains, Figure 1.

Figure 1: A typical daytime spectrum for the vertical electric field measured near Kingston,
Rhode Island, showing the first five Schumann Resonances modes, Polk
(1982).
The first five SR modes (0-35 Hz) coincide with the frequency range of the first four EEG
bands. The primary EEG frequency bands are: Delta, 0.5 to 4 Hz, Theta, 4-8 Hz, Alpha, 813 Hz and 13 to 30 Hz, Malmivuo and Plonsey (1995). Hence resonant absorption and
reaction is biophysically plausible.

3
Resonant absorption of an oscillating signal is a classical physics phenomena used to
detect extremely weak signals with particular frequency matching characteristics, even in
the presence strong static fields and other oscillating fields. This is used in the
telecommunication systems. It is also used for vital biological telecommunication in brainto-cell and cell-to-cell communication that is necessary to maintain healthy homeostatic
relationships. The SR signal also has diurnal and seasonal variations in parallel with the
local sunlight Zeitgeber and it persists through cloudy periods and during Arctic and
Antarctic dark winters.
SR Signal Frequency:
The Schumann Resonance signal is generated by tropical thunderstorms and is a set of
resonant modes within the resonant cavity formed between the earth's surface and the DRegion of the ionosphere. It consists of a spectrum of ULF/ELF resonant peaks with a
fundamental frequency of about 7.8 Hz and broad resonant peaks typically at 14, 20, 26,
33, 39, 45 and 51 Hz. An example of the measured daytime spectrum of the first five
modes is given in Figure 1. The frequencies vary systematically diurnally primarily with the
local D-region height, but also with the tropical thunderstorm activity.
SR Signal Strength:
Balser and Wagner (1960) recorded the SR signal over several days in June 1960 in
Boston, USA. They measured a mean RMS vertical electric field strength of this ELF
signal of 0.6 mV/m. Polk (1982) summarized several measurement programmes, covering
the first three resonant peaks. He gives the vertical electric field range as 0.22-1.12 mV/m
(0.013-0.33 pW/cm2). König (1974a) gives the typical electric field strength as 1 mV/m
(0.27 pW/cm2) and the magnetic field as 10-5 A/m (12.6 pT). Williams (1992) reports 5
years of SR magnetic field intensity measurements from Rhode Island with monthly mean
8Hz mode intensities in the range 1.3 to 6.3 pT.
Diurnal and D-Region effects:
Readings from M.I.T. in Boston were the first to show the frequency spectrum of the SR
signal, Balser and Wagner (1960). They found that there was a frequency and intensity
shift between day and night. The first five modes dominated the daytime. At night their
intensity and frequency decreased and a large proportion of signals were less than 4 Hz.
This frequency and intensity shift is the result of increasing the depth of the resonant
cavity in the nocturnal hemisphere. The ion/electron density in the D-Region reduces
rapidly after sunset as the solar production of ions ceases and recombination dominates.
The dependence of the SR signal on the D-Region was established by initial theoretical
models, Tran and Polk (1979). They showed that the Q-value of the resonant cavity
depended on the conductivity of the atmosphere between 40 and 100 km, most strongly
between 40 and 60 km altitude. Sentman and Fraser (1991) confirmed the sensitivity of
the SR signal to the local height of the D-Region. The D-Region correction increases the
correlation coefficient from r=0.39 to r=0.82, a highly significant improvement.
Role of Tropical Thunderstorms:
The dominant diurnal pattern in the SR signal frequency and intensity is primarily the
result of the D-Region diurnal electron density variation, but it is also modulated by the
diurnal incidence of tropical thunderstorms, Polk (1982). These produce peaks of intensity

4
as the peak of daily solar heating passes progressively from Africa to the Americas and
then Asia, Nickolaenko, Hayakawa and Hobara (1996). This produces a single peak in
January (southern summer) and three peaks at 0800, 1400 and 2200 UST in August
(northern summer), Sentman and Fraser (1991). The close correlation between the
monthly tropical temperature anomaly and 8Hz SR signal intensity was shown by Williams
(1992). His data also reveals the strong influence of the El Nino/La Nina events. El Nino
produces hotter mean conditions and La Nina cooler conditions. There are corresponding
increases and decreases in SR signal intensity.
D-Region Characteristics:
The D-Region of the Ionosphere has electron density profiles that vary significantly with
diurnal, 27-day, seasonal and sunspot cycles, and with solar flares and storms, Nicolet
and Aikin (1960), King and Lawden (1962), Titheridge (1962), Craig (1965), Matsushita
and Campbell (1967), Akasofu and Chapman (1972), Coyne and Belrose (1972), Mitre
(1974), Rawer (1984). Craven and Essex (1986), and Hargreaves (1992).
Following a solar flare there is a prompt enhancement of the D-Region through the
enhanced ionization from the arrival of cosmic rays. These events are called Sudden
Ionospheric Disturbances (SID). A SID increases the ion density of the D-Region by a
factor of 10 compared with quiet solar days, Belrose and Cetiner (1962). SID monthly
incidence is very closely correlated with Solar Flares and the Solar X-Ray flux, Davies
(1996).
Prolonged enhancement of the D-Region electron density was observed for at least 5
days, Craven and Essex (1987) and Balon and Rao (1990), and for at least 6 days,
Belrose (1968). The enhancement was particularly strong at night. This effect has been
called the post storm effect (PSE). The most probable explanation is the induced
precipitation of electrons from the Van Allen Radiation Belt, Hargreaves (1992).
The dependency of the SR signal on the D-Region and the sensitivity of the D-Region to
the S-GMA strongly indicates that the SR signal should be closely following the changes
in solar and geomagnetic activity. This predicts that the SR signal will be highly correlated
with the solar cycles and the S-GMA events. The solar cycles include the diurnal, 3.5 day,
weekly, 13.5 day, 27-28 day solar rotation, semiannual, annual, 11 year and 22 year
cycles, and a number of harmonics, Chapman (1936), Cliver, Boriakoff and Bounar (1996)
and Cornelissen et al. (1998). During solar flares the electron pattern in the D-Region
predicts that there will be a prompt enhancement for a day of 2 and then a prolonged
enhancement for 6 to 7 days and then falling off quickly. If a second or subsequent SGMA events occur within this period the effects should be cumulative.
ULF/ELF Resonant Absorption:
It is noted above that the EEG and SR signal share a ULF/ELF frequency range making
resonant absorption possible. Extensive research shows that it is highly likely. Adey
(1990) summarized observations of cellular level electric field strengths. The cell
membrane potential, a static DC field across the cell membrane, is of the order of 105
V/cm. The EEG brain waves have a typical amplitude of 10-1 V/cm. The brain successfully
operates using oscillating signals a million times smaller than the membrane potential.
Fish, birds, primates and humans have been shown to detect and react to ULF/ELF
signals in the range 10-7 to 10-8 V/cm, more than a million times less than the EEG electric

5
field. A recent study involving flat worms (Planarian Dugesia tigrina) identified a threshold
for 60 Hz electric fields of 5 x 10-8 V/cm for induced reproductive anomalies, Jenrow,
Smith and Liboff (1996).
The biophysical mechanism for these effects was found when seeking to understand why
ULF/ELF signals alter primate and human reactions times and their EEG signals, Adey
(1981). It was shown that environmental electromagnetic fields in this frequency range
significantly altered the cellular calcium ion fluxes and EEGs in brain tissue, Bawin,
Gavalas-Medici and Adey (1973), Bawin and Adey (1976) and Adey (1980). The field
strength involved was 10-7 V/cm. Since then the calcium ion efflux/influx effect has been
observed in many independent laboratories. The effect is taken as established by
overwhelming evidence in a review, Blackman (1990). The effect is a function of the
modulation frequency more than the signal intensity since it is a resonant phenomenon
involving non-linear, non-equilibrium reactions, Adey (1993).
Thus the evidence trail goes from environmental ULF/ELF signals altering cellular calcium
ion homeostasis and altering the EEG which alters reaction times. The modulation
frequencies involved are in the ULF/ELF range and these are the frequencies of the EEG,
ECG and cell-to-cell communication oscillating ion systems. All of these systems primarily
use oscillating calcium ion currents, Alberts et al. (1995). Kandel, Schwartz and Jessell
(2000). In order to react to a very low intensity entrained signal a "receiver" must be able
to resonantly absorb the signal and adjust by tuning into it. The tuning aspects of brains
and cells involve cortical hormone related phase-locked loop circuits, Ahissar et al. (1997).
A phase-locked loop circuit produces a feed-back signal in proportion to the phase
difference between the entrained signal and the reference signal. This shows that brains
absorb, detect and respond to extremely low intensity ULF/ELF environmental
electromagnetic signals. The evidence shows that it is possible for the brain to detect,
tune into, and respond to the SR signal.
König, a student of Schumann's, took readings of the SR signal. He observed the close
similarity of the SR signal with the EEG alpha rhythm, both of which dominate the daytime,
and the local sferics 3 Hz signal with the EEG delta rhythm, that dominate the night, König
(1974a). The close similarity, including the diurnal pattern and extensive laboratory
experiments, prompted König to postulate that the EEG had evolved to use these natural
signals, König (1974). This study supports the hypothesis of this study. The SR signal has
a reliable, long-lived and globally available diurnal pattern, with ULF/ELF frequency
ranges that match natural biological frequency ranges. It is plausible and reasonable that
if the SR signal is detected by mammal brains then this has a purpose. The SR signal
could be used to help to synchronize ULF/ELF biological oscillators as a Zeitgeber (time
giver). Without an external reference signal biological systems tend to drift into longer
period cycles as part of their adaptive flexibility. It is the role of the circadian Zeitgeber to
synchronize the biological cycles with the daily cycles. A daily Zeitgeber is not
appropriately precise to synchronize ULF/ELF oscillations. A ULF/ELF environmental
signal is necessary for this ULF/ELF Zeitgeber function.
The Schumann Resonance is proposed for this role. It then makes logical sense to extend
it to be the biophysical mechanism for the biological and health effects of S-GMA. It is
postulated that when the SR signal is in its normal range, associated with normal levels of
S-GMA, the synchronization process is healthy. When extreme levels of S-GMA carry the
intensity and frequency of the SR signal to extreme values, then this is proposed as the
mechanism for altering the EEG, altering the melatonin/serotonin balance, primarily

6
through melatonin reduction during enhanced activity such as solar maximum and solar
storms. This provides a logical and testable model to evaluate the hypothesis.
The Circadian Cycle:
The natural diurnal metabolic system that has developed to maintain thermal homeostasis
within a highly variable climate provides a direct mechanism for a wide range of health
effects. The primary endocrine system involved in the diurnal (circadian) cycle is the
Melatonin/Serotonin system initially operating between the pineal gland and the
hypothalamus. A particular part of the hypothalamus is the suprachiamatic nucleus (SCN).
It contains the "biological clock". There are high affinity melatonin and serotonin receptors
in the brain and throughout the central nervous system (CNS). This includes the
autonomic and sympathetic nervous systems, Chabot et al. (1998), Beresford et al.
(1998), Naitoh et al. (1998), Andrade (1998), Al-Ghoul et al. (1998), Verge and Calas
(2000) and Hunt et al. (2001). Melatonin modulates the functional sensitivity of the
serotonin receptors, Dugovic, Leyson and Wauquier (1991).
The cardiovascular system is regulated with melatonin receptors in the heart, arteries and
lungs, Pang et al. (1993), Viswanathan et al. (1993) and Guardiola-Lemaitre (1997). Heart
rate variability (HRV) is used to monitor the autonomic nervous system, Salo et al. (2000),
and reduced HRV is a risk factor for heart disease, Carney et al. (2000). Savitz et al.
(1999a) quote a conclusion from a recent National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
workshop that epidemiological evidence strongly implicates activation of the autonomic
nervous system as a causal link in the onset of cardiovascular disease.
There are also melatonin receptors in the vital organs throughout the body that are part of
the diurnal cycle system. This includes the pituitary gland, to regulate the production of
Growth Hormone and Thyroid Stimulating Hormone, Vriend, Borer and Thliveris (1987).
Melatonin has direct action in the immune system through the T-Lymphocytes (T-Helper
Cells), interleukin-2 and -6 (IL-2. IL-6) and natural killer cells (NK-cells) through melatonin
receptors on the T-Cells. This enhances the natural and acquired immunity, Poon et al.
(1994), Maestroni (1995), Garcia-Maurino et al. (1999) and Currier, Sun and Miller (2000).
Melatonin receptors have been identified in a number of peripheral organs and tissues.
For example, melatonin receptors maintain intraocular pressure (IOP) in the eye, Osborne
(1994). The reproductive regulation is coordinated using melatonin receptors in the testes,
prostate, ovary, mammary gland and other reproductive organs, Pang et al. (1998). The
fetus has many melatonin receptors so that the maternal melatonin can communicate daily
and seasonal cycles in utero, Naitoh et al. (1998) and Thomas et al. (1998).
Through receptors melatonin regulates the diurnal and seasonal activity. This involves
metabolism, body temperature, blood pressure, heart beat, peripheral blood flow,
respiratory activity, sleep-wake cycle, reaction times, hormone levels and immune system
blood cells. It also involves the humoral organs of the lung, heart, kidney, spleen, liver and
lymphocytes of the immune system, Wever (1974) and Ishida, Kaneko and Allada (1999).
The body has a highly regulated and strongly integrated system that has developed to
produce healthy living in the face of diurnal and seasonal climatic variations. Melatonin
plays a central role. Environmental factors that alter the melatonin/serotonin balance have
the ability to influence all of the functions and organs that the circadian
melatonin/serotonin cycle uses for thermal homeostasis. This includes blood pressure,

7
impairment of the immune system, cardiac, neurological and reproductive diseases, and in
the extreme, death. Melatonin is also a highly potent antioxidant that scavenges free
radicals from cells, Reiter (1994). This implicates reduced melatonin in neurological,
cardiac, reproductive and carcinogenic illness and death, Reiter and Robinson (1995).
The Schumann Resonance Hypothesis:
The hypothesis of this study is that:
"The Schumann Resonance signal is detected by the brain where it interacts with the EEG
and through altering the melatonin/serotonin balance, it is the biophysical mechanism for
the health effects of S-GMA".
As a corollary, it provides an ULF/ELF, diurnal and seasonal synchronization reference
signal, a Zeitgeber (time giver).
A systematic evaluation of the SR Hypothesis and the GMA Melatonin mechanism will be
carried out in the context of a model. The Model outlines all of the linking elements, from
the solar, geomagnetic and ionospheric activity to the biological and health effects
associated with S-GMA, with the SR signal and induced melatonin reduction at its core.
The Model:
This model was conceived with the Schumann Resonance Hypothesis at its core, assisted
by the Melatonin Mechanism. It involves the following elements:
a.

Solar activity is highly variable and the level of activity is transferred to the earth
promptly through cosmic radiation and over several days through large clouds of
ionized plasma transported in the solar wind. These produce significant
characteristic changes to the earth's magnetosphere and ionosphere, including the
lowest layer, the D-Region.

b.

The Schumann Resonances are a spectrum of ULF/ELF radio signals generated by
tropical thunderstorms, radiating around the world at the speed of light, ducted
within the resonant cavity formed between the lowest layers of the ionosphere (DRegion) and the earth's surface.

c.

A combination of seasonal and diurnal changes in the D-Region and in tropical
thunderstorm activity, induces strong diurnal and seasonal changes in the SR
signal. Solar sunspot cycles, solar rotation and solar flares and storms produce
characteristic changes in the D-Region which cause characteristic changes in the
SR signal. This leads to highly significant correlations between S-GMA indices and
SR signals.

d.

Human and animal brains naturally use highly reactive, non-linear alterations of
ULF/ELF oscillating calcium ions in neurons and other cells to regulate the basic
cell functions, such as neurotransmitter release and cell-to-cell communication.

e.

Environmental electromagnetic fields in the ULF/ELF frequency range, including the
SR signal, resonantly interact with the natural signals, inducing changes in the

8
cellular calcium ion signals, EEG patterns and reaction times. This produces altered
melatonin/serotonin production.
f.

By altering the neurohormone regulation of the natural cycles, as demonstrated by
the circadian cycle, a wide range of body organs and processes are altered.
Melatonin reduction alters blood pressure and heart rate with cardiovascular and
cardiopulmonary consequences. It also produces neurological, reproductive and
carcinogenic effects and impairment of the immune system. The vast majority of
people cope with these induced changes but the exacerbation of effects in the
weak and vulnerable causes detectable increases in illness and death rates.

g.

Significant alterations in S-GMA cause significant changes in the intensity of the SR
signal. This takes the SR signal strength and frequency outside the normal range,
inducing alteration of brain and heart synchronization and changes the melatonin.
All of the biological and health effects of altered melatonin are produced by these
extreme changes, showing that S-GMA is a natural hazard.

If all the above can be demonstrated, justified and confirmed then there is strong evidence
that the SR signal is the plausible biophysical mechanism for the biological and health
effects of S-GMA, primarily through altered melatonin. This would confirm that S-GMA is a
natural hazard for human beings. The Model Elements (a) to (d) are established by
published research cited above.
Two corollaries arise from the hypothesis and model. The first relates to the public health
implications of residential, occupational and military exposures to ELF and ELF modulated
signals. If extreme variations of natural extremely low intensity ELF signals causes human
health effects, then it is highly probable that humanly produced ELF fields that are many
orders of magnitude higher than the naturally occurring signals, are also causing
significant similar health effects. Since residential and occupational studies are available,
this evidence is used to independently test the hypotheses.
The second corollary arises because of the strong dependence of the SR intensity on the
tropical temperature anomaly, Williams (1992). This means that the more extreme weather
associated with Global Warming, including extremes of El Nino/La Nina events, will cause
stronger extremes of SR signals. Especially around sunspot maximum and during periods
of strong solar storms, this is predicted to accentuate the adverse health effects
associated with S-GMA.
Methods:
The steps taken to evaluate the hypothesis and the model are:
1. Seek correlation between S-GMA indices Ns and Kp and the SR signal.
2. Review of the studies relating ULF/ELF signals, including SR signals and human
reaction times and circadian rhythms.
3. Review of the evidence that ULF/ELF electromagnetic fields reduce melatonin.
4. Summarize the biological and clinical studies relating reduced melatonin to health
effects.

9

5. Give an example of sunspot data relationship to human health effects to illustrate the
principles and problems of environmental epidemiological studies in an EMR polluted
world.
6. Summarize the studies relating S-GMA to biological and health effects under the
headings of reproductive, cardiac, neurological and cancer effects in order to evaluate
the role of melatonin and homeostatic patterns.
7. The prediction from the hypothesis that similar effects should occur in residential and
occupational studies is evaluated to determine conflict or confirmation of the
hypothesis.
8. A brief review of the use of Schumann-like signals for therapy in neurological patients
is presented as a further evaluation of the hypothesis.
9. Conclusions are drawn and further clarifying research is suggested.
Correlation to Causation:
If variable A is correlated with variable B, and variable B is correlated with variable C, then
variable A is correlated with variable C. However, none of these relationships necessarily
imply a causal relationship. The S-GMA indices are highly correlated with biological and
health effects. The observed and established characteristics of the atmosphere predict
that through the S-GMA effects on the D-Region, the SR signal should be closely
correlated with the S-GMA indices. Hence if this correlation is confirmed then the SR
signal will also be correlated with the biological and health effects.
A plausible and supported mechanism that explains the connective processes is crucial in
moving towards establishing a causal link. The Schumann Resonance signal is favoured
for this purpose because of the matched frequency range allowing resonant absorption in
the brain. It is supported by the existence of a natural ULF/ELF Zeitgeber, Wever (1974),
for which the SR signal characteristics comply. The close dependence of the SR signal on
the D-Region implies that there should be a correlation with the biological and health
effects correlated with S-GMA.
Statistical Methods:
Sunspot Number (Ns) and GMA indices Ap and Kp, and the Schumann Resonance
frequency and intensity data for two US sites, were downloaded from publicly accessible
web sites in the United States. Statistical analysis involves several standard methods.
Time series cycle frequency analysis uses the Maximum Entropy Spectrum method. Trend
analysis uses the least squares fit (LSF), linear correlation coefficient, and the MantelHaenszel t-test using a two-tail method to estimate the probability, p-value. For a sample
size = N there are N-2 degrees of freedom. The t-value is calculated from the correlation
coefficient (r) and the degrees of freedom, t = r [(N-2)/(1-r2)]0.5.
For large samples of N>120 elements, using the Student t-distribution, the threshold for
significance is p=0.05 and t=1.96. When p=0.01 it is highly significant and has t=2.576.
The very highly significant, p=0.005 has t=2.795 and the extremely significant, p=0.001

10
has t=3.291, Robson (1967), Chou (1972) and Sprott (1990). A sample with 1002 data
points, N=1000, and if r = 0.4 then t = 13.8 and p<10-12.
For some samples in this analysis the t-value exceeds 5 and occasionally even >10. A
log/linear graphic method was used to estimate the p-values for large samples with higher
t-values. For t=4.85, p=10-6; for t=6.3, p=10-9; and for t=7.8, p=10-12. Any value more
significant than this is referred to as p<10-12.
Data-sets used for this analysis:
The geomagnetic field strength is measured at a large number of stations. A global
network of 12 stations are integrated to produce 3-hour averaged indices. One is a linear
index, Ap or ap, and another is a pseudo-logarithmic index, Kp. The subscript "p" refers to
a planetary index. A common index of solar activity is the sunspot number, Ns. Sunspots
are indicative of long-term changes in the solar activity and the Ap and Kp indices of the
short-term activity experiences at the surface of the earth, such as the effects of solar
flares or solar storms, Campbell (1997).
Solar and Geomagnetic Indexes were down-loaded from the U.S. NGDC-NOAA web-site
[ftp://ftp.ngdc.noaa.gov/STP/GEOMAGNETIC_DATA/INDICES]. The 3-hourly global index
Kp, a semi-logarithmic measure of GMA was used for most calculations. Daily sunspot
number was also used.
The SR data for two sites in California was downloaded from the University of California,
Berkeley web-site [ftp://quake.geo.berkeley.edu/pub/em/]. A three-year data-set was
assembled covering the period 13th January 1997 to 31 December 1999.
The two SR recording sites were Parkfield (PKB) (lat. 35.8892; long. -120.4249) and
Hollister (SAO) (lat. 36.765, long. -121.445). Two sets of data files were available. The first
contained 15-minute measurements of the east-west and north-south components of the
0-20 Hz field intensity in pT and the center frequency of the 8Hz peak. The intensity data
was vectorially added and the frequency was averaged.
The PKB and SAO hourly data were extremely strongly correlated, p<10-12. Hence missing
data was replaced through a linear least squares fit relationship. Some signal instability
was detected with large changes in single 15-minute data points. These were removed
using a linear interpolation filter. Smoothing using 1/4-1/2-1/4 was applied prior to
averaging to a form an hourly mean data set for PKB for the period 1997-1999. The first
12 days of 1997 were rejected because of clear data errors.
The second SR set of data involved three orthogonal components with the signals
analysed into 13 frequency ranges. This data was used to characterize the ways in which
diurnal frequency changes occurred. The 11th column contained the 1-2 Hz SR intensity.
The three components were combined vectorially. The unit of pT/Hz1/2 was converted to
pT by multiplying by √2. This data was compiled to form a 3-year data set of hourly mean
observations to carry out correlations with Kp and Sunspot numbers.
Figure 2 shows the 20-day mean values of the measured 0-20 Hz SR intensity from the
PKB site for the three years of the study period.

11

Figure 2: The time sequence of 20-day averaged Schumann Resonance signal intensity in
the 0-20 Hz range. From the UC Berkeley dataset, for the three years used in
this study. The trend is highly significant, p<0.0001.
The SR 20-day mean signal is extremely highly correlated with the 20-day mean sunspot
number, r=0.881 N = 54, t=13.4, p<10-6. The trend in Figure 2 is primarily due to the mean
rise in sunspots over this period toward the sunspot maximum in the year 2000. The
seasonal pattern is related to tropical thunderstorm activity. It is lower during the southern
summer and higher during the northern summer.
Annual variations relate to the El Nino/La Nina oscillation. The year 1997 was an El Nino
year with higher than average tropical temperatures. By May 1998 it had switched to a La
Nina event with lower than average tropical mean temperatures. The La Nina was weak
during 1999. Hence the temperature effect raised the 1997 SR intensity and lowered the
1998 SR intensity. Adjusting for this would increase the significant correlation with the
sunspot number. Figure 2 reveals the prime of factors, sunspot activity and tropical
temperature, that change the long-term mean SR signal intensity.
Graphical and statistical comparison between Kp and SR:
A GMA storm was shown to significantly increase the frequency of the primary SR models,
Cannon and Rycroft (1982). Consistent with the effect of the D-Region, this also implies
that the SR intensity was significantly increased. This is evaluated with the data set
available comparing the Kp index with the SR 0-20 Hz intensity. An initial relationship
between the 3-hour Kp GMA index and the 0-20Hz SR intensity from the PKB site shows
some vital features and confirms the earlier observations. Figure 3 shows the 0-20Hz SR
signal and the Kp Index for March 1999.
The SR signal, Figure 3, shows the distinctive regular diurnal oscillation. Kp shows strong
GMA in the first half of the month, weak GMA from the 15th to 27th and then a GMA event
starting on the 28th. The overall SR signal reflects these broad changes. The first 10 days
show an upward trend suggesting a cumulative effect. Individual GMA events, e.g. on the
4th, 10th, 14th appear to show a time delay. A lagged linear correlation analysis of the 3-

12
hourly mean data, reveals the highest correlation with a 6-hour lag, r=0.312, t=5.123,
p<10-6.

Figure 3: Schumann Intensity (0-20Hz) from the UC Berkeley PKB site (upper graph) and
Kp Index (lower graph) for March 1999.

Figure 4: Schumann Intensity (0-20Hz) from the UC Berkeley PKB site (upper graph) and
Kp Index (lower graph) for May 1997.
Figure 4 shows an example of a more periodic variation of GMA, from May 1997. The
periodic Kp variation is clearly reflected in periodic changes in SR intensity with a small
time lag. Lagged correlation analysis shows a significant correlation of with a 24 hour time
lag, r=0.290, t=4.66, p<10-5.
Both of these patterns are consistent with the characteristics of the D-Region during and
following GMA events. There is strong support for the process suggested that prolonged
leakage of ions and the cumulative effect of repeated events builds up the ion density and
elevates the SR signal following GMA events. The whole 3-year data set was used in two

13
analyses to see if a lagged correlation analysis and a superimposed epoch analysis would
confirm or contradict the patterns seen in Figures 3 and 4.
Lagged correlation between Kp index and SR signal:
The Kp index is a reliable measure of diurnal GMA activity. Since it is available as a 3hour mean value, the SR signal was averaged over 3-hours to form a comparable data
set. The lagged correlation analysis was carried out using a statistical packaged based on
GWBASIC. This had a limited memory allocation that restricted the analysis to a maximum
of 28 months of 3 hourly data. The period September 1997 to December 1999 was
chosen because it contained the most reliable SR data. Lagged correlation analysis for
the total period of 2.33 years, 3406 data points, shows extremely significant correlations
for the 0-20Hz SR intensity dataset, Figure 5, and significant correlations with the 1-2 Hz
dataset, Figure 6.
The Student t-value was used for the y-axis in Figures 5 and 6 because it is directly
related to the significance of the correlation coefficient. This has also been converted to
the statistical probability, p-value for a data set for which n = 6575.

Figure 5: The statistical Student T-value of the time lagged correlation between the 3-hour
Kp index and the 3-hr mean Schumann Resonance Intensity for the 0-20Hz
band, for the period September 1996 to December 1999.
This analysis shows extremely significant correlations between the Kp index and the SR
signal intensity. The patterns in both Figures 5 and 6 confirm the influence of electron
densities in the D-Region with highly extremely significant correlations. They both show a
strong and extremely significant initial increase, a prompt response for the first night and
day and a persistent relationship that extends out for 6 to 7 days after the day of the event
(Day 0) and then it drops off significantly. The correlation also shows a 24-hour diurnal
oscillation. This final drop-off after 7 days is stronger in the 1-2 Hz signal, Figure 6, that is
more dominant at night.

14

Figure 6: The statistical Student T-value of the time lagged correlation between the 3-hour
Kp index and the 3-hr mean Schumann Resonance Intensity for the 1-2 Hz
band, for the period September 1996 to December 1999.
These analyses give strong confirmation of the part of the model proposing that the SR
intensity is strongly dependent on the D-Region electron density. It shows that through
slow electron leakage the solar storm events last for about 7 days and this is shown by the
SR signal.
Superimposed Epoch Analysis:
The above analysis uses the continuous time series of data over 28 months. An
alternative approach is to identify isolated GMA events and to carry out a Super Imposed
Epoch Analysis to produce the average signal during before, during and after the
moderate to strong GMA events. In the 3-year period being studied 69 relatively isolated
GMA events were identified. The intensity of the 0-20 Hz SR signal and the frequency of
the 8 Hz signal were averaged over the 3 days prior to and the 6 days following each
event, Figures 7 and 8. The overall variance of the hourly data over this period was 0.017
pT for the SR intensity and 0.0026 Hz for the SR frequency.
Figure 7 shows prompt response of an elevated 0-20Hz SR intensity, especially over the
first two days. The SR signal is still elevated, especially at nighttime, for at least 6 days
after the GMA event. The SR 8 Hz band frequency, Figure 8, shows a smaller response
on average, with a large prompt response of increased frequency and a faster recovery of
the nocturnal signal frequency. The prolonged effect is small but still evident after 6 days.
Both the signal intensity and frequency are consistent with the lagged correlation analysis
above showing a prompt response and a prolonged recovery period of 6 to 7 days.

15

Figure 7: Superimposed epoch analysis of the impact of a Geomagnetic events, as
defined by the Kp Index, for the mean anomaly in the Schumann Resonance 020 Hz intensity for 69 events in 1997 to 1999. GMA events occurred on day
zero.

Figure 8: Superimposed epoch analysis of the impact of a Geomagnetic events, as
defined by the Kp Index, for the Schumann Resonance 8Hz band frequency
anomaly for 69 events in 1997 to 1999.
Thus the individual months, the lagged correlation and superimposed epoch analyses
confirm that the SR intensity reliably, consistently and extremely significantly varies with
the GMA as indicated by the Kp index. The results are fully consistent with a prompt and a
prolonged D-Region electron density effect. Hence the biological and health effects that
are correlated with GMA indices are also correlated with the GMA related changes in the
SR signal.

16
Correlations with Sunspot Number:
Sunspot number (Ns) is a direct indicator of solar activity. On a monthly basis Ns is highly
correlated with GMA over a 100 year period from 1830 to 1930, Chapman (1936).
Chapman also shows that sunspot activity peaks at about 3.5 days prior to a magnetic
disturbance and that there is a 27 to 28-day cycle in the GMA index, and that there is a
semi-annual cycle in the GMA. Using the daily data for the nearly 3 year period from
12/1/97 to 31/12/99 both the 0-20 Hz intensity and the 8 Hz frequency variations as a
function of daily sunspot number are extremely significantly correlated, N=1085.
For the SR intensity r = 0.376, t = 13.33, p<10-12, for the SR frequency r = 0.436, t = 15.91,
p<10-12. Figure 9 shows the scatter diagram for the daily intensity data as a function of
daily sunspot number.

Figure 9: Daily mean SR intensity (0-20Hz) as a function of daily sunspot number for the
period 12/1/97 to 31/12/99.
Figure 9 shows a distinct and significant rise in SR intensity with daily sunspot number. As
shown above the tropical temperature anomaly also has an impact, Figure 2. It adds a
great deal to the scatter. For example, of the 42 days with SR intensity 0.15 pT below the
trend line, 40 occur in the 1998/99 period that was dominated by La Nina when negative
temperature anomalies produce lower than average SR intensities. The daily tropical
temperature anomaly was not available so the data could not be adjusted for this factor.
The SR intensity and frequency is extremely highly correlated with daily and the 20-day
average sunspot number, confirming that effects that are correlated with Ns are also very
highly correlated with the SR signal.
Cyclic Analysis:
A cyclic analysis has been used in other studies to identify causative relationships through
closely matched cyclic factors, Komarov et al. (1998). The sun's mean rotation period of

17
about 27-28 days has a series of recognised sub-harmonics of about 18, 14, 9, 7, 5.5 and
3.5 days. Hence a Maximum Entropy Power Spectrum analysis was carried out on the 35
good data months of the SR intensity record, Figure 10.

Figure 10: Maximum entropy spectrum for the 2-day average 0-20 Hz Schumann
Resonance Intensity for the period February 1997 to December 1999.
Figure 10 shows a distinct peak at 27 days and weak peaks at 9 and 14 days
corresponding to solar cycles. This confirms that the SR intensity varies in a cyclic manner
with a dominant 27-day period that coincides with the solar and GMA primary subseasonal period. This shows that the S-GMA modulates the SR intensity and reinforces
the extremely strong correlations already identified. There is also weak evidence of a cycle
with a period between 3.2 and 3.5 days in the SR intensity. This is near the
circasemiseptan cycle identified above that has important biological consequences.
Using the 20-day average data for the 3-year period shows a strong semi annual, 185 day
peak in the SR intensity signal.
SR Signal and S-GMA relationships:
The first test of whether the SR signal is the plausible biophysical mechanism for the
biological and health effects of S-GMA was to see if the SR signal was correlated with
sunspot number and the Kp GMA index. This analysis shows that all correlations are
extremely significant and supported by superimposed epoch and cyclic analyses. Hence it
is confirmed that the SR signal has all of the necessary and appropriate characteristics to
link S-GMA cycles and events with biological and health effects. This supports and
confirms the Model Element (c).

18

Biophysical Mechanisms:
ULF/ELF Reaction Time experiments:
The original work of Dr Ross Adey's laboratory on calcium ion efflux, was stimulated by
observations of ULF/ELF environmental fields altering monkey reaction times in a field
strength dose-response manner with a 7 Hz signal, Gavalas-Medici and Day-Magdaleno
(1976), and human reaction times, Hamer (1965, 1969) and König (1974). They were also
aware of Wever's circadian rhythm experiments. Dr Adey's research showed that the
altered reaction times were associated with altered EEG patterns and altered calcium ion
efflux from neurons, Adey (1981). Calcium ion efflux was significantly altered between 0.5
and 30 Hz, Adey (1980), and in windows of frequency up to 510 Hz, Blackman et al.
(1988). Hence there is an established biophysical pathway between the resonant
absorption of very weak ULF/ELF environmental fields in the brain, altered cellular calcium
ion homeostasis, altered EEG pattern and altered reaction times.
The frequency range involved in the reaction time, EEG and calcium ion alterations
include those of the primary SR signal, 0-32 Hz. Thus it is biophysically plausible that the
SR signal could be associated with altered brain activity and reaction times through
resonant interactions with neurons involving changed calcium ion signals.
Human reaction time experiments in association with ULF frequencies, primarily 3 Hz and
8 to 10 Hz, were carried out in Germany and the United States in the 1950s and 1960s.
This was stimulated by observations that a large experiment involving nearly 50,000
members of the public found that human reaction time were significantly correlated with
the intensity of the 8-10 Hz SR signal, König (1974b), Figure 11.

Figure 11: Human reaction times as a function of Schumann Resonance 8-10 Hz relative
intensity. Reaction times measured using a light flash and a Morse key, tested
during 18 days in September 1953, at the German Traffic exhibition in Munich.
Each point represents 4500 subjects, with the mean variance of 3.6 ms shown
as error bars. Trend: t = 10.414, 2-tailed p<0.0001. Data is derived from Figure
3 of König (1974b). The relative intensity is estimated to be in the range 0.6 to 1
pT for the 0-20 Hz band.

19

The first power spectrum analysis of the SR signal was Balser and Wagner (1960). König
and his colleagues had recorded the SR signal on chart recorders and so they
characterized the signal as a "10 Hz" oscillation, when it contained up to 32-40 Hz
oscillations but the 8 Hz and 14 Hz signal dominated. As a consequence in laboratory
experiments a 10 Hz signal was used to approximate the SR signal. Both König and
Hamer confirmed that the "10 Hz" signal sped up reaction times. Hamer showed that
moving the frequency from 7.5 to 8.5 Hz and 8.5 to 9.5 Hz significantly altered reaction
times with an rms electric field intensity of 3.8 mV/m.
König also found that a superimposed epoch analysis related to the arrival of 3 Hz signals
locally generated thunderstorms, significantly slowed reaction times. This was tested and
confirmed in a series of laboratory experiments using human volunteers. König found that
with a range of field strengths, 1 to 5 V/m, the "3 Hz" signal consistently slowed people's
reactions and a "10 Hz" signal consistently accelerated people's reaction times. Reactions
were also correlated with the more objective test for galvanic skin response (GSR), using
a 5 V/m 3 Hz signal, König (1974b).
König reviewed the experiments carried out by Hamer (1965, 1969) and agreed with
Hamer that human reaction times are influenced by ELF fields in a predictable way.
Hamer showed that this occurred with field strengths down to 3.8 mV/m. He observed
significant reaction time changes occurred with frequency changes from 8 Hz to 9 Hz.
Also, the minimum voltage threshold or field strength is very low and in the range of the
natural fields in the atmosphere. This includes the SR signal at around 1 mV/m.
Circadian ELF Zeitgeber Experiments:
Support for the role of the SR signal as a diurnal Zeitgeber came from the Max Planck
Institute's long-term isolation experiments, Wever (1974). The Max Planck Institute set up
an elaborate, large and careful experiment to investigate the hypothesis that there was a
natural electromagnetic field, such as the Schumann Resonance, that acted as a circadian
Zeitgeber. This was promoted because of König's experiments. Because the daily sunlight
cycle is a very dominant Zeitgeber, the hypothesis was tested by constructing two identical
rooms in which all signs of the usual daily variation, sunlight, temperature, humidity etc,
were removed. The second room (Room 2) was also shielded to significantly reduce (by
over 40 db) all external oscillating electromagnetic fields.
From introductory experiments, rectal temperature was identified as a reliable objective
measure of the daily circadian rhythm. In the isolation rooms the free running day length
was significantly lengthened in Room 1 from 24 to 24.87 hr. In Room 2 it was significantly
longer than Room 1, 25.26 hr, p<0.01. The standard deviation of the variation of day
lengths was also significantly higher in Room 2 compared with Room 1, p<0.01. An
additional feature was a phenomenon termed internal desynchronization. In this case
individuals showed much longer and highly erratic daylengths. While 15 of 50 subjects in
the shielded Room 2 internally desynchronized, none of the 34 subjects did in Room 1,
p<0.001. The desynchronized subjects were followed up because of their evident
sensitivity.
König had characterized the primary mode of the SR signal as a "10 Hz" signal. Hence
Wever's team used a square-wave 10 Hz, 2.5 V/m signal in Room 2 to see what would
happen if a Schumann-like signal was introduced. Without the subjects knowledge a 10

20
Hz signal was turned on and off at varying intervals. This signal consistently removed the
desynchronization and reduced the mean daylength for those subjects, Wever (1967,
1968). The longer the circadian cycle in the absence of the field, the greater was the
shortening by the 10 Hz signal, r = 0.928, n=10, p<0.001. This showed that not only was a
highly significant phenomenon occurring, but it also varied in an very significant and
reasonable manner.
Wever concludes that his team found "significant proof that electromagnetic fields in the
ELF range influence human circadian rhythms, and therefore, human beings". They
proved that there is a ULF/ELF electromagnetic signal that is a circadian Zeitgeber. By
design the corrective signal mimics an aspect of the SR signal. While it could be another
signal there is no other known signal has the appropriate characteristics. Hence it is highly
likely that the ULF/ELF circadian Zeitgeber is the SR signal.
Taken together the experiments of König, Hamer and Wever give very strong support for
the hypothesis that the SR signal is involved as a diurnal Zeitgeber, that it is detectable by
the human brain and that it causes induced alterations in reaction times. This is highly
consistent and gives considerable support for the SR hypothesis.
Laboratory evidence that ULF/ELF signals alter reaction times, animal and human EEGs,
neuron cell calcium ions and neurotransmitters gives further support. This makes the
hypothesis biophysically plausible and observationally supported and therefore, largely but
not finally confirmed.
Evidence of ULF/ELF induced Melatonin Reduction:
The SR signal has ULF/ELF frequencies. Hence evidence that ULF/ELF electromagnetic
fields reduce melatonin or increase serotonin in animals and people is relevant to the
Hypothesis and its GMA Melatonin Mechanism.
There is extensive evidence that ELF signals increase serotonin and reduce melatonin in
animals and in people. Rosen, Barber and Lyle (1998) state that seven different
laboratories have reported suppression of nighttime rise in pineal melatonin production in
laboratory animals. They show that a 50 µT, 60 Hz field with a 0.06µT DC field, over 10
experiments, averages a significant 46% reduction in melatonin production from
pinealocytes. Yaga et al. (1993) showed that rat pineal response to pulsed ELF magnetic
fields varied significantly during the light- dark-cycle. They showed that magnetic field
exposure significantly suppressed the rate-limiting enzyme in melatonin synthesis, Nacetyltransferase (NAT) activity, during the mid- to late-dark phase.
Suppression of melatonin in rodents is frequently observed when they are exposed to
weak electromagnetic fields. A question has been raised as to whether the pineal gland or
the eyes are the sensors of the fields. Brendel, Niehaus and Lerchl (2000) carried out an
experiment to resolve this question using hamsters. They concluded that there was
significant suppression of melatonin with 16.7 Hz, p<0.01, and with 50 Hz, p<0.001 as a
result of primarily mechanisms in the pineal gland.
Stark et al. (1997) observed a significant increase in salival melatonin in a group of 5 cows
when the short-wave radio transmitter at Schwarzenberg, Switzerland, was turned off for
three days, compared to 5 cows that had much lower RF exposure. Hence, despite the
high natural levels of variability of melatonin, there are now at least ten independent

21
observations of significant melatonin reduction in animals from ULF/ELF and RF
exposure.
Many human studies that show significant alteration of the melatonin/serotonin balance by
electromagnetic fields. Wang (1989) observed a dose-response increase in serotonin in
workers exposed to ELF fields and Davis (1997) a dose-response decrease in melatonin
in workers. Human melatonin reduction studies from ULF/ELF electromagnetic fields
include: Wilson et al. (1990), Graham et al. (1994, 2000), Pfluger and Minder (1996),
Arnetz et al. (1996), Davis (1997), Wood et al. (1998), Karasek et al. (1998), Burch et al.
(1998, 1999a, 2000) and Juutilainen et al. (2000). For a residential population exposed to
a SW radio signal in Switzerland, Abelin (1999). Seven directly involve correlation of
melatonin reduction with GMA variation, Bardasano et al. (1989), Bartsch et al. (1994),
Burch et al. (1999b), Rapoport et al. (1997, 1998, 2001), and Weydahl et al. (2001).
Thus there is very strong evidence that ULF/ELF electromagnetic fields, down to very low
mean intensity levels, with dose-response relationships, and in association with GMA,
reduce melatonin in people and in animals. Under normal criteria this level of evidence
would be assessed as a causal biological effect.
S-GMA and melatonin reduction:
In addition to Burch et al. and Rapoport et al, additional direct evidence that reduced
melatonin is significantly correlated with S-GMA is available. Bardasano et al. (1989)
observed an extremely significant reduction (p<0.001) in synaptic ribbons of pinealocytes
of rats during geomagnetic storms compared with quiet solar days. Thyroxine levels in a
single limbic epileptic patient were highly correlated (r = 0.66) in a dose-response manner,
with daily GMA, O'Connor and Persinger (1996). The strongest association (r = 0.76) was
found between thyroxine levels and the Kp index during the previous night (2 am to 5 am).
These analyses were carried out specifically to test the GMA Melatonin mechanism and
they support it.
Seasonal melatonin variation in rats was correlated with the seasonal variation in the
earth's geomagnetic field, Bartsch et al. (1994). A group of hospital patients with
cardiovascular pathology and a control group of healthy people were both monitored
during magnetic storms. In both groups magnetic storms increased the cortisone,
activated the sympathoadrehenal system and reduced melatonin, Rapoport et al. (1998).
Burch et al. (1999a,b) measured urinary melatonin metabolite in 149 workers exposed to
60 Hz magnetic fields. Reduced melatonin was correlated with 3-phase conductor
exposure, cellphone use and overall magnetic fields, with a dose-response decrease in
workers exposed to low light levels. When all of these effects were removed from the data,
it also showed a highly significant reduction of melatonin for GMA fields above 35nT,
p<0.01. When the data was stratified over 6 GMA levels a very highly significant (p<0.005)
dose-response decrease in melatonin from people was found using a Global 36 hr aaindex, Figure 12.

22

Figure 12: Reduction in the melatonin metabolite 6-OHMS in µg in urine from U.S. electric
utility workers, as a function of the 36 hr global GMA aa-index, Burch et al.
(1999b).
There are multiple studies showing that ULF/ELF fields and those specifically involving SGMA, reduce melatonin with high levels of significance and with a highly significant doseresponses. These are indicative of a causal relationship with melatonin reduction and
GMA. This gives very strong support to Model Element (e), the GMA Melatonin
Mechanism and the Schumann Resonance Hypothesis through the widespread
involvement of ULF/ELF signals in laboratory, occupational studies and involving GMA.
Biological implications of reduced melatonin:
Melatonin is a ubiquitous neurohormone whose production is low during the day and high
at night. It passes through cell membranes and acts as a highly potent antioxidant to
scavenge free radicals that cause damage to DNA, Reiter (1995). Hence melatonin
reduction is involved with diseases produced by free radicals, including cancer, aging,
neurological diseases, acute heart disease and heart attack, Reiter and Robinson (1995).
The circadian cycle involvement of melatonin shows that reduced melatonin will alter
blood pressure and heart rate, neurological cardiopulmonary and reproductive functions. It
suggests that it will also reduce immune system competence and enhances the risk of
cardiac, neurological and carcinogenic disease and death through reducing its antioxidant
activity. These predictions are checked against clinical studies.
Melatonin reduction and health effects:
Reiter and Robinson (1995) and Brzezinski (1997) review the clinical studies involved with
reduced melatonin. Dr Brzezinski identifies roles for melatonin in sleep and circadian
rhythm, mood, sexual maturation and reproduction, cancer, immune system response and
aging. Dr Russell Reiter, an eminent melatonin researcher, is the founder and editor-inchief of the Journal of Pineal Research. Reiter and Robinson confirm all of the effects
identified by Brzezinski, and add arthritis, asthma, diabetes, hypertension, blood clotting

23
and stroke, cardiac arrhythmia, ischemic heart disease, heart attack, epilepsy, manic
depression, suicide, sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), Alzheimer's and Parkinson's
Diseases. Published papers are cited to justify each of these health effects. Most of the
associated conditions relate to the oxidative damage by free radicals and melatonin's
multiple roles as a potent antioxidant, sleep enhancer and immune system booster. But
melatonin also acts as a neurohormone and a cellular messenger with receptors in the
nuclei of many cells.
In his conclusion Brzezinski favours high clinical doses for melatonin-related therapy.
However he cites three trials where 0.1 to 0.3 mg/day was effective at enhancing sleep.
Reiter also cites the M.I.T. study of Dollins et al. (1994). He uses it to confirm the long
known effect of melatonin on sleep. In the M.I.T. study, by far the biggest incremental
effect of melatonin on sleep onset latency and sleep duration was the first 0.1 mg dose.
With at least two other studies confirming the M.I.T. study this confirms that very low daily
doses of melatonin have very significant clinical effects.
Since S-GMA significantly reduces melatonin in a dose-response manner, all of these
health effects have the potential to be associated with S-GMA. There are four primary
areas that are of particular interest in S-GMA related studies. They are cancer, SIDS, and
cardiac and neurological disease and death, including heart attack and suicide. These are
all related to reduced melatonin in clinical studies and through the diurnal regulatory
mechanisms.

S-GMA related health effects:
Principles and problems with environmental epidemiology studies:
In seeking to identify and confirm environmental disease agents human populations are
studied in attempts to correlate health effects with exposures to agents. Often other
factors produce complex variations in the health effects. These are called confounders.
Methods have been developed to deal with complex situations and to identify individual
agents where possible. Time series analysis where cyclic frequencies can identify
common features can be helpful. Multiple regression analysis can also assist. When
erratic events are involved the problem can be reduced significantly.
In seeking to identify the effects of natural electromagnetic fields generated by Solar
activity through the Geomagnetic System, the "disease agent", extremely low intensity
electromagnetic fields, are being masked and interfered with in developed societies with
power supply systems, telecommunications, appliances, computers, etc. This means that
earlier records and records from less developed populations could well have "cleaner"
relationships with S-GMA indices. This effect is referred to by Villoresi et al. (1998) who
found significant correlations between heart attack incidence rate and GMA storm events
in the data from 14 large hospitals in St Petersburg for 1989-1990. Weekly analysis
showed a rather constant rate during Monday to Friday and sharp decrease in rates over
the weekend and during mid-week festivities. They associated this with different EMR
exposures during work days and holidays, mainly due to the electrified public transport.
This is confirmed by studies showing significantly higher hypertension and coronary heart
disease in electric train drivers, Ptitsyna et al. (1996).
To illustrate the principles and problems, an analysis of annual time series data for suicide
in Southeast Asia was carried out for the period 1974-1992. The data was extracted from

24
Table II-3-24-1 from a report of the Southeast Asian Medical Information Centre, SEAMIC
(1997). Suicide is a good bio-indicator for this purpose because of its clear diagnosis and
its direct connection to clinical depression and altered melatonin homeostasis. Data is
given for the Philippines, Thailand, Singapore, and Japan. The period and the range of
countries, give a range of development, with its stress levels, health recording systems
and EMR exposures. The order of the countries reflects increasing development, health
recording systems and exposures to artificial EMR. The data shows an increase in the
recorded annual mean male suicide rate from 0.66 in the Philippines, 6.9 in Thailand, 12.4
in Singapore, and 23.1 in Japan (per 100,000 population).
The period covers just less than two solar cycles with two sunspot maximums in 1979/80
and 1989/90 and sunspot minimum in 1986. The suicide rates are generally higher in the
later half of the period than the earlier years. When linear trends are removed it is found
that Thailand and the Philippines are positively correlated with the sunspot cycle and the
highly developed Singapore and Japan it is weakly negatively correlated. The principle of
signal to noise ratio, associated with more EMR exposures in developed societies and
more complete and more accurate data recording promotes Thailand as the most likely
country to detect a sunspot cycle in the annual suicide data. This relationship has been
expressed as annual sunspot number vs the annual male suicide rate in Figure 13.

Figure 13: Annual male suicide rate per 100,000 for Thailand from 1974 to 1992, in
relation to the annual sunspot number. The correlation coefficient is r = 0.817,
p<0.0001.
Figure 13 shows an extremely significant correlation between annual sunspot number and
annual male suicide rate in Thailand over the period 1974-1992. This is consistent with the
S-GMA melatonin link.
Cancer, especially leukaemia and breast cancer, is associated with melatonin reduction.
In this data-set the four countries cancer rates are ranked similarly, except Thailand is
lower than the Philippines. Thailand's annual male leukaemia rate is correlated with
sunspot number, r = 0.473, p<0.05. So is the female Breast Cancer rate, r = 0.687,
p<0.005 and the male Cerebrovascular Disease mortality, r = 0.696, p<0.002.

25
This data is consistent with the SR hypothesis in that it significantly correlates human
health effects with a S-GMA index (Ns) that is highly correlated with the SR signal.
Secondly, it is consistent with the GMA Melatonin Mechanism as it also involves the
increases in the health effects associated with reduced melatonin. The failure for the
sunspot activity to be seen in the Singapore and Japan data is probably being masked by
increased nighttime light levels and elevation of exposures to artificial electromagnetic
fields, Reiter (1994).
These analyses show how it is becoming more difficult to detect sunspot cycles in human
health records. The erratic nature of GMA events still allows the detection of their effects
despite the increasing UHF/ELF noise which is reducing the signal to noise ratio. Of
particular concern is the use of technologies, such as the GSM mobile phone, that uses a
217 Hz pulse rate with an 8.34 Hz modulation, Stewart (2000). This is in the range of the
primary mode SR spectrum signal and the EEG Alpha-Rhythm.
S-GMA related reproductive effects:
The fetus has melatonin receptors to detect mother's diurnal cycle. Sparks and Hunsaker
(1988) reported the results of necropsy samples of infants who died of Sudden Infant
Death Syndrome (SIDS). They found that their pineal gland was highly significantly
smaller than aged-matched controls, p<0.005. In follow up measurements of 111 SIDS
infant's showed smaller pineal glands in 106 infants, raising the significant to p<0.0001.
This strongly implied that reduced melatonin was associated with SIDS. This suggests that
since GMA is strongly correlated with reduced melatonin then it could well enhance the
rate of SIDS.
O'Connor and Persinger (1997) showed the GMA does cause SIDS. They used monthly
SIDS statistics from 1960-1961 in Ontario, Canada. They compared the monthly SIDS rate
with the monthly average aa GMA index. The data was stratified within the levels of aa in
10 nT intervals. This showed that there was a highly significant increase in SIDS for the
number of days with aa in the 11 to 20 nT range, r=0.91, p<0.001, and in the 31 to 40 nT
range, r = 0.65, p<0.01. For the intermediate range, 21 to 30 nT there was a highly
significant reduction of SIDS, r = -0.79, p<0.001. Their strongest correlation occurred for a
reduction of SIDS between days with 21 to 25 nT, r = -0.96, p<0.0001. This shows a
homeostatic relationship between the GMA level and the rates of SIDS with far lower SIDS
rates near the mean GMA level 21-30 nT and significantly higher rates for lower and
higher GMA levels. Since melatonin levels are linearly reduced with elevated GMA levels,
and SIDS is a melatonin-related syndrome, this study implies that both elevated and
reduced melatonin can induce increased SIDS rates.
The possible role of micropulsations (PC1: 0.2-5 Hz) on SIDS rates during periods of very
low GMA was then studied, O'Connor and Persinger (1999). Using a similar method they
found that stratifying the data into 11, 5 nT interval levels, there was a marginally
significant correlation with increased micropulsations levels, r = 0.63, p<0.05. Consistent
with O'Connor and Persinger (1997), they also found a negative correlation r = -0.79) at an
intermediate level of PC1, 15 to 20 nT. They noted that the PC1's usually occur in 1 to 4
hour periods over 5 to 7 quiet days following an isolated geomagnetic storm. This shows
that the effects would also be correlated with the SR signal that has the same pattern of
lasting up to 7 days after a solar storm, Figures 5 and 6.

26
Hence both of these studies are consistent with the SR mechanism and a melatonin
reduction homeostatic effect causing biological damage to the fetus at both very low and
very high GMA levels that correspond to significantly reduced and increased intensities of
the SR signal, respectively.
S-GMA related Cardiac effects:
A 35-year old cardiologist, with a family history of hypertension and stroke used an
electronic blood pressure monitor to record his blood pressure every 15 minutes for 3
years. This revealed a significant periodicity of 27.7 days in systolic and diastolic blood
pressure and heart rate, which was coherent with the GMA Kp index, Watanabe et al.
(1994).
An Italian study of 447 patients with hypertension also found very significant correlations
between systolic and diastolic blood pressure and GMA indices over a 5-year period,
Ghione et al. (1998). A multiple correlation with potential confounding factors, such as age
and date, confirmed the significant correlation with GMA. Stratifying the days into quiet,
disturbed and highly disturbed GMA days always showed significantly higher values in the
highly disturbed days for all blood pressure parameters except systolic night-time
pressure. The difference between quiet and highly disturbed GMA days was 6 to 8 mm for
the 24 hour systolic and diastolic blood pressure. The GMA indices and the blood
pressure measurements contain the 27-day period. The authors concluded that these
results seem to reflect a real relation between geomagnetic disturbances and blood
pressure.
Two independent studies show that human blood pressure is significantly correlated with
GMA. Melatonin is a diurnal blood pressure regulator and S-GMA modulates human
melatonin levels, therefore these studies confirm that blood pressure change is a
melatonin-related biological effect of S-GMA. Hence it is biologically plausible that extreme
levels of S-GMA will cause a wide range of cardiac health effects and death.
Reduced melatonin produces arrhythmic cardiac activity. The cardiac activity of rabbits
was monitored during two GMA storms, Chibisov et al. (1995). At the initial and main
phase of the storm the normal circadian structure of the cardiovascular parameter was
lost. Desynchronization grew during the storm, leading to an abrupt drop of cardiac activity
during the main phase of the storm. This was followed by the destruction and degradation
of cardiomyocytes. The parameters of cardiac activity became significantly synchronized
and the circadian rhythm restored during the storm's recovery period.
Human patients with ischemic heart disease (47-men and 33-women) were monitored for
cardiac parameters daily over for 2-3 weeks, Gurfinkel'lul et al. (1995). Changes in their
microcirculations were related to GMA and to changes of atmospheric pressure. In the first
day of a GMA storm pathological changes of capillary flow were detected in 71.5% of
patients with acute myocardial infarction (men: 73.7%, women: 69.2%). They also
observed perivascular edema, red blood aggregation, delay and slowing down of capillary
flow. Similar changes were detected in 64.8% of patients with angina pectoris, (men:
73.3%, women: 56.3%). The reactions of these patients to GMA disturbances were over
2.5-times higher than the effects of atmospheric pressure changes.
GMA events are significantly correlated with increased blood coagulation and platelet
aggregation, Pikin, Gurfinkel and Oraevskii (1998). Actual blood pressure, capillary flow

27
and blood coagulation and aggregation changes are observed during GMA events,
consistent with the effect expected with reduced melatonin in people with heart disease.
Therefore, we can reasonably predict that GMA will be associated with observable
changes in cardiac disease and death when large populations are studied.
GMA related Human Cardiac Disease and Death:
Early correlations between S-GMA and heart attacks were assumed by some authors to
be spurious, inaccurate and inconsistent, Malin and Srivastava (1979, 1980) and Knox et
al. (1979). Results found in India were not confirmed in populations in the U.S.. These
were seen as inconsistent. The lack of a plausible mechanism also made these results not
credible to some researchers. Artificial EMR exposures in the developed countries
masking the natural signals effects is a plausible explanation of the results. In the 1990's
many other studies identified relationships that are highly significant and consistent with
the original results.
With clinical measurement being able to identify highly significant changes in blood
pressure, blood flow, aggregation and coagulation during GMA events, these results are
extremely strong. They are mediated by melatonin in the normal diurnal and seasonal
cycles. Since melatonin is also significantly correlated with levels of GMA during solar
storms this will also have cardiac effects. Reduced melatonin is associated with cardiac
arrhythmia and heart rate variability in clinical studies cited above.
De Bruyne et al. (1999) studied older heart patients (>55 years) and compared their heart
rate variability (HRV) with their increased risk or mortality from myocardial infarction. They
found that both decreased and increased HRV were significant risk factors, with increased
HRV being the greater risk factor. This shows a timing related homeostatic relationship
and GMA events are related to desynchronization of cardiac rhythms. HRV also
demonstrates anomalies in myocardial infarction, sudden death, heart failure, autonomic
neuropathy and hypertension, Kerut, McKinnie and Giles (1999).
The EEG, pulse rate, blood pressure and rate of sensomotor reaction was measured in a
group of people. They significantly correlated these physiological variables with the Kp
index, Doronin et al. (1998). They noted that the oscillations in the Kp index had identical
periods in the monitored EEG Alpha-Rhythm. This confirms the whole-body changes that
occur in conjunction with GMA alteration by changing the brain and heart patterns. This
supports the model that suggests that the brain wave pattern is changed, involving
alteration of ELF brain signals, and this is transferred through melatonin receptors and the
autonomic nervous system to the cardiovascular system.
Cardiac Effects of High GMA:
During periods of Active Sun and increased GMA the following statistically significant
effects have been observed:
• Cardiac Arrhythmia in children, Markarov (1998).
•

Novikova and Ryvkin (1977) observed a consistent and significant increase in heart
attack incidence and death between active and quiet GMA conditions for 1961-66 at
Sverdlovsk, USSR.

28
• GMA is highly correlated with daily myocardial infarction incidence rates during big
GMA storms, Villoresi et. al. (1998).
• GMA activity is also correlated with sudden cardiovascular death, Sitar (1990), and
Ischaemic Heart Disease mortality, Otto et al. (1982).
•

Stoupel and Shimshoni (1991) found that monthly solar activity was highly significantly
correlated with monthly hospital heaths for cardiovascular disease. Solar activity is
highly correlated with GMA and SR intensity.

•

Stoupel et al. (1997) observed that during periods of low solar and geomagnetic
activity, solar proton fluxes were correlated with cardiovascular deaths.

• Oraevskii et al. (1998a) found that 75 % of GMA storms caused an increased of the
hospitalization of patients with myocardial infarction by 30 to 80%.
•

Oraevskii et al. (1998b) report that MIR space orbital station staff experienced a
significant increase and stabilization of heart rate, reduced heart rate variability and
decreased respiratory waves, corresponding with a specific adaptation of stressreaction. At the same time hospital patients with ischemic heart disease had a similar
reaction including deterioration of the physiological status, rheologic blood
characteristics and heart rate disturbances.

•

Breus et al. (1998) also report different of cardiovascular activity on MIR astronauts
during the main phase of solar storms compared to the recovery phase. Similar effects
were observed in rabbits.

Cardiac Effects of Low GMA;
Periods of Quiet Sun are significantly associated with:
• Stoupel et al. (1990) found a highly significant correlation (p=0.01) for higher pregnancy
induced hypertension for monthly periods of low GMA.
• Sudden death from cardiac arrhythmia, especially paroxymal atrial fibrillation, and
stroke, Stoupel (1993) and Stoupel et al. (1995a). Stoupel, Martfel and Rotenberg
(1994). Stoupel, Martfel and Rotenberg conclude that their results are consistent with
previous studies showing increased heart electrical instability during periods of lowest
geomagnetic activity.
• Ischaemic Heart Disease for ages >70 years. Stoupel et al. (1995b).
• Stoupel et al. (1999) found an extremely significant inverse correlation (r= -0.64,
p=0.0001) for a 72 month period between solar activity and stroke/ischemic heart
disease death. They concluded that monthly ratio of deaths from stroke/ischemic heart
disease is related to environmental physical activity.
The cardiac studies are consistent with the Schumann Resonance Hypothesis and add
considerable weight to the melatonin, homeostatic and arrhythmic factors in the
Hypothesis. Blood pressure, coagulation, heart attack, cardiac arrhythmia and sudden

29
cardiac death are highly correlated with GMA in a homeostatic (U shaped) manner. This
data is consistent with the involvement of melatonin. Being directly supported by clinical
cardiovascular monitored changes of blood pressure, capillary flow and blood
aggregation, multiple studies and extremely significant correlations with solar activity and
GMA. This gives very strong evidence pointing to a causal relationship between Ischemic
and arrhythmic cardiovascular disease, heart attack and death and GMA. The highly
significant correlation between S-GMA and the SR signal intensity gives strong support for
the SR hypothesis through a melanin mechanism.
Neurological Effects:
The brain is a very sensitive electromagnetic organ. The model and hypothesis proposes
a direct mechanism for SR signals to interact with the brain, altering the EEG and
neurohormones in response. Altered reaction time is a prompt and acute indication of this
interaction. It has been shown that exogenous ELF signals affect melatonin/serotonin,
dopamine and opiate systems, Frey (1995). This is plausible through interference with
endogenous ELF systems and the vital role of calcium ion signalling. Melatonin reduction
is directly correlated with S-GMA levels that are highly correlated with a natural exogenous
ELF field, the SR signal. Given the biological effects of reduced melatonin, this predicts
that there could well be a wide range of melatonin related neurological effects correlated
with solar cycles and GMA events. A large number of studies have been carried out and
are summarized below.
Epileptics are primary subjects for the detection of acute effects of GMA on human
neurological functions because of the frequency-based dysfunction that they suffer from.
Karlov, Selitskii and Sorokina (1996) compared the reactions of 18 healthy individuals and
20 epileptic patients to magnetic fields modulated in the EEG frequency range. They
showed that alteration of the magnetic field elevated the functional activity of the brain
synchronizing structures and increased either epileptic activity or activation of epileptic
focus. Sandyk and Anninos (1992a and b) report success in reducing epileptic seizures
with picoTesla ULF magnetic fields with SR-like frequencies. Sandyk (1992) relates these
results to the alteration of the EEG alpha rhythm (8-13 Hz), pineal melatonin and magnetic
field altered circadian seizure incidences.
Belisheva et al. (1995) concluded that their observations showed that local GMA
variations can be a principle reason for modulation of the brain's functional state. They
also conclude that this means that an optimal level of GMA, manifested in periodic
oscillations in certain amplitude frequency range is demanded for steady brain's function
state. The decrease of optimal GMA activity level and the appearance of aperiodic
disturbances of GMA can be a reason of unsteady brain's state. This gives strong support
for the role of the SR spectrum in the homeostasis of brain activity.
The EEG, pulse rate, blood pressure and rate of sensomotor reaction on a group of
people were significantly correlated with the Kp index, Doronin et al. (1998). They noted
that the oscillations in the Kp index had identical periods in the monitored EEG alpharhythm. This confirms a GMA-related modulation of the EEG alpha rhythm, which could
well be the SR signal. This was independently confirmed by Belov, Kanunikov and Kiselev
(1998), who monitored the EEGs in 26 human subjects.
A positive correlation between the EEG data and GMA was revealed, being most obvious
in the frontal and central lobes of the brain. A negative correlation between some local

30
EEG synchronization and indices of solar activity was also observed. They concluded that
the degree of synchronization of the spontaneous EEG seemed to reflect sensitivity of the
human nervous system to the earth's magnetic field. This confirms a role for a S-GMArelated mechanism, most likely the SR signal. They observed a stressor response to
strong GMA events and a sedative effect from low frequency magnetic oscillations. This is
consistent with the experiments of König and Hamer who showed that the alpha-rhythm
related 10 Hz signal stimulated people and the 3 Hz delta-rhythm related signal slows
people.
Neurological Effects of High GMA:
•

Tambiev, Medvedev and Egorova (1995) found a significant correlation between GMA
and memory and attention. Aviation accidents are positively correlated with solar
storms, Komarov et al. (1998). Through cyclic analysis the authors concluded that
there was a causal relationship because of strong frequency matching between
aviation accidents and GMA event cycles.

•

This was confirmed by Selitskii, Karlov and Sorokina (1999) who, by artificially
reducing GMA, were able to increase the synchronization of alpha-rhythm EEG and
generalized slow-wave discharges in epileptics. This shows that increased GMA
produces de-synchronization of the EEG alpha-rhythm and results in significantly more
frequent convulsive seizures.

•

GMA disturbances suppress the cortical reactivity to external receptive stimuli and
raise the functional activity of the cerebral inhibitory components, such as the caudate
nucleus in awake cats, Makarova (2000).

•

A total of 40 men and women were tested for the effects of changes in the local
geomagnetic field and their writing of pleasant and unpleasant stories, Persinger,
Richards and Koren (1994). A double-blind method was used in the application of 10
mG fields over the right and left temporal lobes separately and together. Men and
women receiving the stimulation showed significantly more pleasantness when
exposed to the right hemisphere than the left. Covariance with changes in the natural
geomagnetic field was negatively correlated with pleasantness, increasing the
significance of the experimental treatment.

•

A group of 127 human volunteers were studied over a 4-year period and were
observed to show a step-like increase in partial sensory deprivation (mainly hearing
and seeing) for GMA levels above 15 nT, r = 0.33. The strongest correlation was found
for the GMA during the 3-hr period at the beginning of the previous nights sleep,
Persinger and Richards (1995).

•

Rats being studied for chronic limbic epileptic effects showed significantly more
aggression (r = 0.5) during GMA events, Persinger (1997). Intense aggression was
observed for aa> 40 nT.

•

St Pierre and Persinger (1998) found that aggressive biting in rats was positively
correlated with GMA. Persinger (1999) identified a moderate association between
annual GMA and the probability of war in the same year.

31
•

Avdonina EN, Samovichev EG (1995) evaluated relationships between S-GMA,
especially for the days that serial crimes were committed during 1980-1990 in USSR.
The analysis of 150 episodes (ten separate series) shows that the crimes are most
probable immediately or 1-3 days after sharp decrease of solar activity (Wolf numbers),
geomagnetic activity (A3 and K indices) and of lowest daily surface and air
temperature.

•

Bureau and Persinger (1995) investigated the time taken to initiate an epileptic seizure
as a function of the level of GMA. They found that the latency decreased in a doseresponse manner with GMA level. A 20-25 nT level reduced the latency by 12 %.
Bureau, Persinger and Parker (1996) were studying rats with induced limbic seizure
hypothermia. During high GMA, >35nT, depth of hypothermia was significantly reduced
(p<0.001). In the subsequent 5 days mortality was increased when GMA >20 nT.

•

In three separate experiments, Michon, Koren and Persinger (1996) tried to clarify the
means by which GMA levels affected spontaneous epileptic seizures in rats. A 700 nT
constant intensity signal inhibited the seizures. At lower levels, in the range of natural
GMA a 7 Hz signal, for 5 mins, once per hour, in the period midnight to 8 am,
increased the incidence of seizures the following morning during the presentation of
food. This appears to explain persistent effects of GMA on epileptic seizures.

•

Rajaram and Mitra (1981) found a very significant, p<0.01, correlation between annual
percentage of patients with convulsive seizures in Calcutta and annual mean GMA
over the period 1955-1971.

•

Epileptic seizures and dizziness are correlated with monthly and annual solar activity.
This revealed significant differences between males and females, Stoupel, Martfel and
Rotenberg (1991), Epileptic attacks were highly correlated jointly with GMA and
lunisolar tides, Mikulecky, Moravcikova and Czanner (1996).

•

Persinger (1995) identified a significant correlation between sudden epileptic death
and periods following high daily average GMA, >50 nT. Monthly incidence of sudden
unexplained death was correlated with the monthly incidence of GMA events over 50
nT. They concluded that these results supported the role of the "anticonvulsant"
melatonin.

•

Persinger (1995a) observed a 35 % variance (multiple r = 0.59) for the portion of
seizures related to increased GMA at the same time as the seizure and during the
previous overnight period.

•

Renton and Persinger (1998) monitored the partial epileptic-like experiences in 12
women over two months. Five of the women displayed significant increases when the
daily GMA level exceeded 40 nT.

•

Nikolaev et al. (1976) compared a daily variation of a psychopathological index for a
group in a Moscow mental hospital with the Ap index over a period of 9 months. There
was a very high correlation.

•

Urgent hospitalization for mental disorders and suicide rise significantly with solar
activity, Oraevskii et al. (1998a). Psychiatric admissions increase with solar radio flux
activity (p<0.05) and sudden magnetic storms (p<0.01) and decrease with GMA

32
(p<0.05), Raps, Stoupel and Shimshoni (1991). Admission for Depression increases
significantly after solar storms, Kay (1994).
•

GMA can be considered as a trigger of migraine attacks, De Matteis et al. (1994). They
confirmed this by finding a significant correlation between migraine attack and GMA in
a small geographic area to minimize the climatic differences.

•

Conesa (1995, 1997) associated high GMA with isolated sleep paralysis.

•

The geographic incidence of Multiple Sclerosis is strongly correlated with the
Geomagnetic field rather than latitude, Resch (1995).

Neurological effects of Low GMA:
•

Highly anxious pilots have greater anxiety on days of quiet sun, Usenko (1992).

•

Conesa (1995, 1997) associated low GMA with vivid dreaming.

•

Serial Crime in Moscow increased 3 days after a low solar activity period. Avdonina
and Samovichev (1995).

•

Tunyi and Tesarova (1991) found that suicide, sports injuries, fatal work injuries,
alcoholism are more prevalent during periods of low solar activity.

•

Stoupel et al. (1995a) found that suicide in those older than 70 years was greater
during periods of low solar activity. Stoupel et al. (1995b) found on a monthly mean
basis that suicide was negatively correlated (r = -0.22, p=0.03) with GMA levels.

•

Raps, Stoupel and Shimshoni (1992) found negative correlations for psychiatric
admissions between 1977 and 1987, involving 1829 patients, against sudden
ionospheric disturbances (r = -0.274), GMA index (r = -0.216) and hours of positive
ionization in the ionosphere (r = -0.262).

Neurological Summary:
Acute clinical effects of altered EEG rhythms have been observed in several studies.
Geomagnetic Storms are strongly related to human health effects and death. Increased
GMA, consistent with reduced melatonin, causes arrhythmic brain activity in the form of
epilepsy. The occurrence of epilepsy and sudden unexpected death is highly correlated
with increased solar activity and GMA storm events in many studies involving rats and
people. Suicide is also strongly correlated with enhanced GMA and solar cycles.
There is weak evidence of effects for low GMA activity. For the elderly, >70 years, the risk
is increased for low levels of S-GMA. Low S-GMA has also been associated with anxiety,
vivid dreaming, injuries and alcoholism.
This adds very strong support for the SR hypothesis for elevated S-GMA and melatonin
reduction through altered brain function. Weak support is given for the "U shaped"
homeostatic relationship.

33
S-GMA related Mortality and Birth Rate:
If the above arguments are true than GMA should be correlated with mortality amongst the
very old and very young.
•

Zaitseva and Pudovkin (1995) used a multiple regression analysis involving the annual
sunspot number (Ns) and deviation of the Kp index from average with a 30-year
mortality and birth rate record, 1867-1897 from Russia. They determined that mortality
rate rose significantly (r=0.78) and birth rate dropped significantly (r=-0.67) with
changes in the S-GMA indices Ns and ∆Kp.

•

Shumilov et al. (1998) observed high correlations between traumas, deaths and
sudden diseases with both enhanced and extremely low S-GMA levels, for miners
working at high latitudes in the Spitsbergen mines.

•

Kopanev, Efimenka and Shakula (1979) experimented with rabbits to test the effect of
shielding from the geomagnetic field. They found significantly higher mortality in the
animals shielded from GMF, compared to unshielded controls.

•

A 100-fold shielding of guinea-pigs from the earth's GM field produced a reduction in
ferment antioxidizing activity and non-ferment mechanisms in the heart, along with
reduced carbohydrate metabolism for lipid metabolism, Babych (1995). A similar field
reduction caused an inhibitory effect, down to complete stoppage, of the ciliate
neuronal development of new born rats, Svanidze et al. (1994) and Sandodze,
Svanidze and Didimova (1995).

Cancer Incidence with Sunspot Cycles:
SR signals and S-GMA vary significantly with the sunspot activity, and S-GMA is highly
correlated with reduced melatonin. Melatonin is a highly potent antioxidant and therefore
reduced melatonin causes enhanced DNA damage that can initiate, promote and progress
cancer. Childhood cancer develops very quickly. Most adult cancer has long latencies.
Hence a sunspot cycle related cancer could cluster increased childhood cancer and
cancer initiation around sunspot maximum. Solar cycles could be induced into cancer
cycles. In a similar manner to acute air pollution events in relation to cardiovascular death,
sunspot maximum, a period of years with reduced melatonin, could cluster and "harvest"
those with terminal cancer, accelerating their death. The following studies report some
results.
•

Riabykh and Bodrova (1992) found a significant correlation between Wolf sunspot
numbers and benign breast cancer for women in the middle and late menarche.

•

Dimitrov (1993) found some significant lagged-correlations with malignant melanoma in
Czechoslovakia and solar 7.5 and 11 year cycles.

•

Dimitrov (1999) identified significant solar cycle related Malignant Melanoma and NonHodgkin's Lymphoma (NHL) in adult U.S. populations, and Dimitrov (1999a) correlated
childhood NHL in the U.S. with solar cycles, p<0.05.

This study found significant correlation with male leukaemia and female breast cancer in
Thailand with annual sunspot numbers. There is consistent but limited data to correlate

34
cancer with sunspot activity. The possibility that this related to UV radiation was
considered. Malignant Melanoma (MM) is linked to UV radiation, which varies very slightly
with sunspot activity, 0.16%, Haigh (1996). MM is also significantly elevated in
telecommunications industry in Sweden, Vagero et al. (1985). MM is also associated with
the review of ELF exposures in electrical occupations, Hardell et al. (1995) and with the
highest ELF exposures in Tynes, Reitan and Andersen (1994). Hence it is highly probable
that the relationships found by Dimitrov (1993, 1999) can be related to the SR signal and
unlikely to be caused by sunspot cycle related UV changes.
Other effects:
•

Reproductive and survival rates of micro-organisms, Escherichia (E Coli), Shigella and
Salmonella, were highly correlated with GMA events. The experiments that started 2-4
days prior to a GM storm showed suppression of reproductive capacity followed by its
stimulation. If the storm started on the first day of the experiment then there was a
sharp drop in reproductive capacity and population death occurred within 1 to 5 days.
In periods of low GMA the suppression of reproductive capacity was commonly
recorded, Chernoshchekov (1989).

•

Petrichuk et al. (1992) report on a study of 35 premature and 35 healthy children over
a period of 11 years. GMA was correlated with a range of significant factors, including
a progressive increase in lymphocytes. If intrauterine development took place during a
period of high solar activity, then early development resulted. For both groups the
energetic age-dependent factors vary with the GMA. Lymphocytes that are associated
with fetal and newborn hypoxia are perturbed by a combination of high atmospheric
pressure and GMA, Petrichuk et al. (1998).

•

Stoupel et al. (1993) found that Intra-ocular pressure in relation to four levels of daily
GMA was lowest on stormy days and highest on quiet solar days. This is a melatoninrelated effect.

•

A range of mouse, hamster and pisces cell lines were studied in situations of changing
GMA, Belisheva and Popov (1995). Morpho-functional characteristics, including the
percentage of polynuclear cells, were estimated. GMA causes an abrupt, step-wise
change in the state of the cell cultures. Changes in properties of the cell surface
related to cell fusion, the appearance of heterokaryons, enlargement of cellular
adhesion and aggregation.

•

Polikarpov (1996) studied the biological activity in soil, including DNA synthesis. The
study found that during periods of increased solar and GMA the cell culture S.aureus
209 showed significantly greater biological activity.

Summary about S-GMA biological and health effects:
These studies consistently show that GMA events produce significant biological changes
in micro-organisms (E.Coli and Salmonella) and soil organisms, animal cell-lines, human
lymphocytes and eyes. This is in addition to the above studies showing cancer,
reproductive, cardiac and extensive neurological effects in people that are largely
consistent with melatonin reduction by S-GMA.

35
There is very strong evidence for extreme variations of S-GMA to be classified as a
Natural Hazard for all forms of life on earth. There is strong evidence for the GMA
Melatonin Mechanism and strong evidence for the Schumann Resonance Hypothesis.
The hypothesis and mechanism are supported by ULF/ELF studies showing reduced
melatonin in animals and people.
Residential and Occupational exposures prediction:
Further evaluation of the SR Hypothesis is to evaluate its prediction that if it is valid than
there should be significant increases in cancer, reproductive, cardiac and neurological
effects in human populations exposed to residential ELF and radio/microwave fields.
Typically these fields are about a thousand times higher in terms of the electric field and a
million times higher in terms of exposure intensity and the magnetic field. For example a 1
mV/m SR signal converts to 0.27 pW/cm2. A survey of 15 U.S. cities in 1979/80, Tell and
Mantiply (1980), found the median exposure level was 5 nW/cm2. Around 1 % of the
population was exposed to more than 1 µW/cm2, over 1 million times higher than the SR
intensity. Living near high voltage powerlines are chronically exposes people to ELF
magnetic fields in the range 0.1 to 0.5 µT, about a million times higher than the 0-20 Hz
SR signal at 0.5 pT. If these health effects are found then this strengthens both the SR
Hypothesis and the GMA Melatonin Mechanism.
Electrical occupation and residential health studies:
Cancer Studies:
Hardell et al. (1995) reviewed almost 100 studies carried out up to 1994 and described
significant increases in cancer as possible associations. They concluded that there were
many possible associations. These included an increased risk of leukaemia in children
and the existence of, or distance to, powerlines in the vicinity of their residence.
Occupation exposure to ELF electromagnetic fields showed an increased risk of chronic
lymphatic leukaemia, breast cancer, malignant melanoma of the skin, nervous system
tumours, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, acute lymphatic leukaemia or acute myeloid leukaemia.
Since 1995 many other studies have confirmed and strengthened these conclusions.
For example, Cantor et al. (1995) found that occupational exposure to RF fields
significantly increased female breast cancer. In a very large study, Szmigielski (1996),
showed that RF/MW exposure from radar and radio in Polish military personnel caused
significant increases in cancer mortality across many organs in the body, including brain
tumours (p<0.05) and leukaemia (p<0.001). When the leukaemia was divided into various
types, Lymphoma, Chronic Myelocytic and Acute myeloblastic Leukaemia were all
individually extremely significant, p<0.001. Feychting et al. (1995) found a dose response
increase in childhood leukaemia with exposure to high voltage powerlines, ≥0.5µT RR=
5.1 (95%CI: 2.1-12.6) and Savitz et al. (2000) found a dose-response increase in brain
cancer in electrical workers with the highest exposure giving RR = 2.5 (95% CI = 1.0-6.3).
Reproductive Studies:
Pregnant physiotherapists experience a dose-response increase in early pregnancy
miscarriage using pulsed microwaves for diathermy, Ouellet-Hellstrom and Stewart
(1993). Later pregnancy miscarriage was found in physiotherapists using shortwave
diathermy, Kallen et al. (1982), Larsen et al. (1991) and Taskinen et al. (1990). Kallen et

36
al. and Larsen et al. also showed significant congenital malformation. Miscarriage is also
associated with electronic technicians, Vaughan et al. (1990), and electric blanket use,
Wertheimer and Leeper (1986) and Belanger et al. (1998). It is also associated with
powerline exposure, Juutilainen et al. (1993).
Electrical workers also pass on higher cancer risks to their children, Hicks et al. (1984),
Spitz and Johnson (1985), Johnson and Spitz (1989), Wilkins and Hundley (1990), Bunin
et al. (1990), Wilkins and Wellage (1996), Olshan et al. (1999), Smulevich et al. (1999)
and Feychting, Floderus and Ahlbom (2000). This is likely to be from genetic damage of
sperm associated with reduced melatonin.
Cardiac Studies:
Cardiac effects include reduced Heart Rate Variability with 60 Hz fields, Sastre, Cook and
Graham (1998) and for RF exposure in TV transmission stations. Bortkiewicz et al. (1995,
1996, 1997). Male physiotherapists had significant dose-response increases in Ischemic
heart disease from both short-wave and microwave exposure, Hamburger et al. (1983).
Naval technicians exposed to radar during the Korean War were diagnosed with
significantly higher (p<0.001) cardiovascular disease, Robinette et al. (1980). Savitz et al.
(1999) carried out the most extensive exposure related study and identified significantly
increased and significant dose-response increases in cardiovascular disease mortality in
electric utility workers. This was particularly for Arrhythmia and Acute myocardial
infarction. Significantly elevated risk occurred for all cumulative exposures above 0.6 µTyears. The consistent elevation and exposure gradient effects were found for Arrhythmia
and heart attack but not for atherosclerosis and chronic coronary heart disease. The latter
two were elevated inconsistently. In contrast, Ptitsyna et al. (1996) found a doubling of
chronic heart diseases in train drivers chronically exposed to ULF fields (0.001-10 Hz),
consistent with SR frequencies.
Neurological Studies:
Children chronically exposures to a radar pulsed at 24.4 Hz showed significant impairment
of learning and physical performance, Kolodynski and Kolodynska (1996). ELF exposed
people show significantly more Clinical Depression, Verkasalo et al. (1997); Amyotropic
lateral sclerosis, Deapen and Henderson (1986), Davanipour et al. (1997) and Savitz et al.
(1998), Johansen et al. (1999); Alzheimer's Disease, Sobel et al. (1995, 1996); and Senile
Dementia, Epilepsy, and Motor Neuron Disease, Johansen (2000). Significant increases in
suicide from ELF exposures was reported by Perry et al. (1981) and Baris and Armstrong
(1990). This was confirmed by Van Wijngaarden et al. (2000). They found a significant
dose-response increase relative to recent ELF exposures with a zero exposure threshold.
They relate this to melatonin reduction.
Public Health Conclusions:
Multiple published studies show that residential and occupational exposures to
electromagnetic fields and radiation results in significant increases, including doseresponse relationships, for cancer, reproductive, cardiac and neurological health effects
and mortality. The prediction from the SR Hypothesis is very well confirmed. There is
considerable consistency between the S-GMA studies and the residential and
occupational ELF/RF/MW exposures. The very recent dose-response studies of ELF

37
exposure and heart disease death, suicide and brain cancer all point towards a near zero
threshold of ELF exposure for the level of no effect.
Therapeutic Confirmation:
Solar flares and storms cause a disruption of the SR signal, and are associated with a
range of neurological disorders that are largely melatonin-reduction related. Electrical
occupations, exposed to above average ELF fields, show reduced melatonin and
increased neurological disorders and diseases. If the occupational ELF fields were
masking the SR signal as part of their effect, then a therapeutic treatment to correct the
disorders would be to use a "Schumann-like" signal. Evidence of the effectiveness of such
treatments would support both the SR Hypothesis and the GMA Melatonin Mechanism.
Published papers document an over 20 year history of this being carried out by Dr R
Sandyk in his work with patients who have melatonin related neurological disorders.
Successful individual treatments on hundred of patients have been reported, forming a
highly significant dataset. The treatment primarily involves exposing the heads of patients
to a 7.5 pT magnetic field sinusoidally modulated at a frequency between 4 and 8 Hz,
primarily at 7 Hz. To illustrate this large body of work some recent examples are given.
Disorders successfully treated includes the symptoms of Parkinson's Disease, Sandyk
(1994, 1996, 1997a-d, 1998a, 1999a,b, 1999c), Multiple Sclerosis, Sandyk (1997e-g,
1998b,d). The effectiveness of EMF treatment in MS is reviewed in Sandyk (1997h) and
the melatonin role in MS in Sandyk (1997i). Tourette's Syndrome has also been
successfully treated, Sandyk (1997j).
This confirms that ULF frequency electromagnetic fields near the 7-8Hz Schumann
Resonance peak have strong positive therapeutic effects of correcting the melatoninrelated arrhythmia in neurological diseases. This adds further independent support for the
SR Hypotheses and the involvement of melatonin.
Recommended research to test the Hypothesis:
At the core of the Hypothesis is the postulate that human brains detect and respond to the
SR signal. The response involves altered EEG, reaction times, melatonin production,
blood pressure and heart rate. These need to be tested directly in relation to actual or
experimental SR signals. Experimental design must deal with possible confounders. The
physiological parameters could be monitored during isolated GMA events using local
measurements of the SR signal. Tests need to be developed to detect whether the
physiological parameters are more closely related to Kp or the SR signal. Isolation
experiments, as used by Wever (1974), may be necessary. Correlation of SR signals with
acute health effects, such as SIDS, cardiac arrhythmia, heart attack and suicide could also
be evaluated for indirect but supportive or challenging evidence.
Summary and Conclusions:
S-GMA indices are correlated with the biological and health effects Confirmation of the
Schumann Resonance Hypothesis first required that the SR Signal be highly correlated
with that are correlated with S-GMA. This would show that the SR signal was also
correlated with the observed effects. The SR signal is shown to be extremely highly
correlated with sunspot number and the GMA Kp index. The GMA event analysis confirms

38
that the characteristics of the SR signal closely follow the Kp index and the electron
density patterns in the D-Region. Hence this aspect of the hypothesis is confirmed.
The second aspect was the biological plausibility of the SR signal interacting with the brain
and altering the melatonin production. This is theoretically predicted and plausible through
resonant absorption made possible through frequency matching and tuned circuits. It is
shown conclusively that environmental ULF/ELF electromagnetic fields at extremely low
intensity do interact with brain tissue, changing the calcium ion fluxes, the EEG and
reaction times. Brains and cells use phase-locked loop circuits to detect and respond to
natural ULF/ELF electric signals. Laboratory experiments show that "Schumann-like"
signals do change human and monkey reaction times using ULF to electric field levels
approaching the SR intensity. Human reaction times are also highly correlated, in a doseresponse manner, with SR intensity, confirming this interaction.
The Melatonin Mechanism is strongly supported by multiple independent studies showing
that ULF/ELF fields reduce melatonin in animals and people. The GMA connection is
confirmed directly and with significant dose-response relationships. The GMA health
studies and the occupational and residential health studies are almost all associated with
reduced melatonin, strongly supporting each other and the Melatonin Mechanism of the
SR hypothesis. Independent support is also given by successful neurological therapies
using Schumann-like signals with patients who have melatonin related neurological
illnesses.
Mammals have advanced physiological systems to deal with diurnal and seasonal climate
variations. This involves the melatonin/serotonin system communicating with all the vital
organs in the body in order to maintain thermal homeostasis. External ULF/ELF signals
help to regulate this through providing a Zeitgeber signal. It is highly probable that the
Schumann Resonances provide this signal. It is thus plausible that alteration of the SR
signal by S-GMA is transferred to mammal pineal glands and can affect their vital organs,
especially their brains, CNS, hearts, reproduction and immune systems
The theoretical, experimental and observational data involving animals and people gives
very strong support for the Schumann Resonance Hypothesis and its Melatonin
Mechanism. There is overwhelming evidence that S-GMA is a natural hazard causing
reproductive, neurological cardiac and carcinogenic illness and death with cyclic and
extreme swings in Solar/Geomagnetic Activity. This is supported with the highly plausible
hypothesis that requires only a small amount of confirming research to establish a causal
relationship.
References:
Abelin, T., 1999: "Sleep disruption and melatonin reduction from exposure to a shortwave radio
signal in Switzerland". Seminar at Environment Canterbury, New Zealand. August 1999.
Adey, W.R., 1980: "Frequency and power windowing in tissue interactions with weak
electromagnetic fields". Proc IEEE 68(1), 119-125.
Adey, W.R., 1981: "Tissue interactions with nonionizing electromagnetic fields". Physiol Rev
61(2): 435-514.
Adey, W.R., 1990: "Joint actions of environmental nonionizing electromagnetic fields and
chemical pollution in cancer promotion". Environ Health Perspectives 86: 297-305.

39

Adey, W.R., (1993): "Biological effects of electromagnetic fields". J Cell Biochem 51(4): 410-416.
Ahissar, E., Haidarliu, S. and Zacksenhouse, M., 1997: "Decoding temporally encoded sensory
input by cortical oscillations and thalamic phase comparators". Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci.(USA), 94(21): 11633-11638.
Alberts, B., Bray, D., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K. and Watson, J.D., 1994: "Molecular Biology
of the cell". 3rd edition, New York, Garland Publishing,
Al-Ghoul, W.M., Herman, M.D. and Dubocovich, M.L., 1998: "Melatonin receptor expression in
human cerebellum". Neuroreport 9(18): 4063-4068.
Akasofu, S.I. and Chapman, S., 1972: "Solar and Terrestrial Physics". Publ. Oxford University
Press, London.
Andrade, R., 1998: "Regulation of membrane excitability in the central nervous system by
serotonin receptor subtypes". Ann NY Acad Sci 861: 190-203.
Arnetz, B.B. and Berg, M., 1996: "Melatonin and Andrenocorticotropic Hormone levels in video
display unit workers during work and leisure. J Occup Med 38(11): 1108-1110.
Avdonina, E.N., and Samovichev, E.G., 1995: "Some heliogeophysical characteristics of a series
of especially dangerous crimes". Biofizika, 40(5): 1060-1063.
Babych, V.I., 1995: "The characteristics of tissue lipid peroxidation in the internal organs and the
lipid metabolic indices of the blood plasma in a low geomagnetic field". Fiziol Zh 41(5-6):
44-49.
Balon, N. and Rao, P.B., 1990: "Dependence of ionospheric response on the local time of sudden
commencement and the intensity of geomagnetic storms". J. Atmospheric and Terrestrial
Physics, 52(4): 269-275.
Balser, M. and Wagner, C.A., 1960: "Observations of earth-ionosphere cavity resonances".
Nature, 188 (Nov 19), 638-641.
Bardasano, J.L., Cos, S. and Picazo, M.L., 1989: "Numerical variation in synaptic ribbons of rat
pinealocytes under magnetic storm conditions and on calm days".[In German] J Hirnforsch
30(60: 639-643.
Baris, D. and Armstrong, B., 1990: "Suicide among electric utility workers in England and Wales".
Br J Indust Med 47:788-789.
Bartsch, H., Bartsch, C., Mecke, D. and Lippert, T.H., 1994: "Seasonality of pineal melatonin
production in the rat: possible synchronization by the geomagnetic field". Chronobiol Int
11(1):21-26.
Bawin, S.M., Gavalas-Medici, R and Adey, W.R., 1973: "Effects of modulated very high frequency
fields on specific brain rhythms in cats". Brain Res 58: 365-384.
Bawin, S.M. and Adey, W.R., 1976: "Sensitivity of calcium binding in cerebral tissue to weak
environmental oscillating low frequency electric fields". Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 73: 19992003.

40
Belanger, K., Leaderer, B., Hellenbrand, K., Holford, T.R., McSharry, J-E., Power, M-E, and
Bracken, M.B., 1998: "Spontaneous abortion and exposure to electric blankets and heated
water beds". Epidemiology, 9: 36-42.
Belisheva, N.K. and Popov, A.N., 1995: "Dynamics of the morphofunctional status of cell cultures
exposed to variations in the geomagnetic field at high latitudes". Biofizika 40(4): 755-764.
Belisheva, N.K., Popov, A.N., Petukhova, N.V., Pavlova, L.P., Osipov, K.S., Tkachenko, S.E. and
Varanova, T.I., 1995: "Qualitative and quantitative assessment of exposure to
geomagnetic field variations on the functional status of the human brain". [In Russian].
Biofizika, 40(5):1005-1012.
Belov, D.R., Kanunikov, I.E. and Kiselev, B.V., 1998: "Dependence of human EEG
synchronization on the geomagnetic activity on the day of experiment". Ross Fiziol Zh Im I
M Sechenova, Aug; 84(8): 761-774.
Belrose, J.S., 1968: "AGARD Report 29, 1968, cited in Hargreaves J.K., 1992 "The Solarterrestrial environment", Publ. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Belrose, J.S. and Cetiner, C., 1962: "Measurement of electron densities in the ionospheric DRegion at the time of a 2+ solar flare". Nature 195: 688-690.
Beresford, I.J., Browning, C., Starkley, S.J., Brown, J., Foord, S.M., Coughlan, J., North, P.C.,
Dubocovich, M.L. and Hagan, R.M., 1998: "GR196429: a nonindolic antagonist at highaffinity melatonin receptors". J Parmocol Exp Ther 285(3): 1239-1245.
Blackman, C.F., Benane, S.G., Elliott, D.J., and Pollock, M.M., 1988: “Influence of
Electromagnetic Fields on the Efflux of Calcium Ions from Brain Tissue in Vitro: A ThreeModel Analysis Consistent with the Frequency Response up to 510 Hz”.
Bioelectromagnetics, 9:215-227.
Blackman, C.F., 1990: "ELF effects on calcium homeostasis". In "Extremely low frequency
electromagnetic fields: The question of cancer", BW Wilson, RG Stevens, LE Anderson
Eds, Publ. Battelle Press Columbus: 1990; 187-208.
Bortkiewicz, A., Zmyslony, M., Palczynski, C., Gadzicka, E. and Szmigielski, S., 1995:
"Dysregulation of autonomic control of cardiac function in workers at AM broadcasting
stations (0.738-1.503 MHz)". Electro- and Magnetobiology 14(3): 177-191.
Bortkiewicz, A., Gadzicka, E. and Zmyslony, M., 1996: "Heart rate in workers exposed to mediumfrequency electromagnetic fields". J Auto Nerv Sys 59: 91-97.
Bortkiewicz, A., Zmyslony, M., Gadzicka, E., Palczynski, C. and Szmigielski, S., 1997:
"Ambulatory ECG monitoring in workers exposed to electromagnetic fields". J Med Eng
and Tech 21(2): 41-46.
Brendel, H., Niehaus, M. and Lerchl, A., 2000: "Direct suppression effects of weak magnetic fields
(50Hz and 16 2/3 Hz) on melatonin synthesis in the pineal gland of Djungarian hamsters
(Phodopus sungorus)" J Pineal Res 29(4): 228-233.
Breus, T.K., Baevskii, R.M., Nikulina, G.A., Chibisov, S.M., Chernikova, A.G., Pukhlianko, M.,
Oraevskii, V.N., Halberg, F., Cornelissen, G. and Petrov, V.M., 1998: "Effect of
geomagnetic activity on the human body in extreme conditions and correlation with data
from laboratory observations". Biofizika 43(5): 811-818.
Brzezinski, A., 1997: "Melatonin in humans". N Engl J Med 336(3): 186-195.

41

Bunin, G.R., Ward, E., Kramer, S., Rhee, C.A. and Meadows, A.T., 1990: "Neuroblastoma and
parental occupation". Am J Epidemiol 131(5): 776-780.
Burch, J.B., Reif, J.S., Pittrat, C.A., Keefe, T.J. and Yost, M.G., 1997: "Cellular telephone use and
excretion of a urinary melatonin metabolite". In: Annual review of Research in Biological
Effects of electric and magnetic fields from the generation, delivery and use of electricity,
San Diego, CA, Nov. 9-13, P-52.
Burch, J.B., Reif, J.S., Yost, M.G., Keefe, T.J. and Pittrat, C.A., 1998: "Nocturnal excretion of
urinary melatonin metabolite among utility workers". Scand J Work Environ Health 24(3):
183-189.
Burch, J.B., Reif, J.S., Yost, M.G., Keefe, T.J. and Pittrat, C.A., 1999a: "Reduced excretion of a
melatonin metabolite among workers exposed to 60 Hz magnetic fields" Am J
Epidemiology 150(1): 27-36.
Burch, J.B., Reif, J.S. and Yost, M.G., 1999b: "Geomagnetic disturbances are associated with
reduced nocturnal excretion of melatonin metabolite in humans". Neurosci Lett
266(3):209-212.
Burch, J.B., Reif, J.S., Noonan, C.W. and Yost, M.G., 2000: "Melatonin metabolite levels in
workers exposed to 60-Hz magnetic fields: work in substations and with 3-phase
conductors". J of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 42(2): 136-142.
Bureau, Y.R. and Persinger, M.A., 1995: "Decreased latencies for limbic seizures induced in rats
by lithium-pilocarpine occur when daily average geomagnetic activity exceeds 20
nanoTesla". Neurosci Lett 192(2): 142-144.
Bureau, Y.R., Persinger, M.A. and Parker, G.H., 1996: "Effect of enhanced geomagnetic activity
on hypothermia and mortality in rats". Int J Biometeorology 39(4): 197-200.
Campbell, W.H., 1997: "Introduction to Geomagnetic Fields". Publ. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, U.K.
Cannon, P.S. and Rycroft, M.J., 1982: "Schumann resonance frequency variations during sudden
ionospheric disturbances". J Atmos Terrest Physics 44(2): 201-206.
Cantor, K.P., Stewart, P.A., Brinton, L.A., and Dosemeci, M., 1995: “Occupational exposures and
female breast cancer mortality in the United States”. Journal of Occupational Medicine,
37(3): 336-348.
Carney, R.M., Freedland, K.E., Stein, P.K., Skala, J.A., Hoffman, P. and Jaffe, A.S., 2000:
"Change in heart rate and heart rate variability during treatment for depression in patients
with coronary heart disease". Psychosom Med 62(5): 639-647.
Chabot, V., Caldani, M., de Reviers, M.M. and Pelletier, J., 1998: "Localization and quantification
of melatonin receptors in the diencephalon and posterior telencephalon of the sheep
brain". J Pineal Res 24(1): 50-57.
Chapman, S., 1936: "The Earth's Magnetism". Methuen's Monographs on physical subjects, Publ.
Methuen Co. Ltd, London.
Chapman, F.W. and Jones, D.L., 1964: "Earth-Ionosphere resonances and the propagation of
extremely low frequency radio waves". Nature 202 (May 16): 654-657.

42
Chernoshchekov, K.A., 1989: "A method for studying the effect of the geomagnetic field on the
vital activities of microorganisms in the enteric family". Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol
9: 28-34.
Chibisov, S.M., Breus, T.K., Levitin, A.E. and Drogova, G.M., 1995: "Biological effects of planetary
magnetic storms". Biofizika 40(5): 959-968.
Chou, Y.L., 1972: "Probability and statistics for decision making". Publ. Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, New York.
Cliver, E.W., Boriakoff, V. and Bounar, K.H., 1996: "The 22-year cycle of geomagnetic and solar
wind activity". J Geophys Res 101(A12): 27091-27109.
Conesa, J., 1995: "Relationship between isolated sleep paralysis and geomagnetic influences: a
case study". Percept. Mot. Skills, 80(3 Pt2): 1263-1273.
Conesa, J., 1997: "Isolated sleep paralysis, vivid dreams and geomagnetic influences: II."
Percept. Mot. Skills, 85(2): 579-584.
Cornelissen, G., Halberg, F., Obridko, V.N. and Breus, T.K., 1998: "Quasi-eleven year modulation
of global and spectral features of geomagnetic disturbances". Biofizika 43(4): 677-680.
Coyne, T.N.R. and Belrose, J.S., 1972: "The diurnal and seasonal variation of electron densities
in the midlatitude D region under quiet conditions". Radio Science, 7(1): 163-174.
Craig, R.A., 1965: "The Upper Atmosphere: Meteorology and Physics". International Geophysics
Series Vol 8. Publ. Academic Press, New York and London.
Craven, M. and Essex, E.A., 1987: "Diurnal, seasonal and storm-time variability of the total
electron content of the atmosphere north of Macquarie Island". Australian National
Antarctic Research Expeditions, Research Note 56.
Currier, N.L., Sun, L.Z. and Miller, S.C., 2000: "Exogenous melatonin: quantitative enhancement
in vivo of cells mediating non-specific immunity". J Neuroimmunol 104(2): 101-108.
Davanipour, Z., Sobel, E., Bowman, J.D., Qian, Z. and Will, A.D., 1997: "Amyotropic lateral
sclerosis and occupational exposure to electromagnetic fields". Bioelectromagnetics 18(1):
28-35.
Davies, K., 1996: "Sudden Ionospheric Disturbances". Chapter III.3.11 in "The upper atmosphere:
data analysis and interpretation". Eds W Dieminger, G.K. Hartmann and R. Leitinger. Publ.
Spriner-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg and New York.
Davis, S., 1997: "Weak residential Magnetic Fields affect Melatonin in Humans", Microwave
News, Nov/Dec 1997.
Deapen, D.M. and Henderson, B.E., 1986: "A case-control study of Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis". Am. J. Epidemiol 123(5): 790-799.
De Bruyne, M.C., Kors, J.A., Hoes, A.W., Klootwijk, P., Dekker, J.M., Hofman, A., van Bemmel,
J.H. and Grobbee, D.E., 1999: "Both decreased and increased heart rate variability on the
standard 10-second electrocardiogram predict cardiac mortality in the elderly". Am. J.
Epidemiol., 150(12): 1282-1288.

43
De Matteis, G., Vellante, M., Marrelli, A., Villante, U., Santalucia, P., Tuzi, P. and Prencipe, M,
1994: "Geomagnetic Activity, humidity, temperature and headache: is there any
correlation?". Headache, 34(1): 41-43.
Dimitrov, B.D., 1993: "Heliophysical activity and incidence variations of skin malignant melanoma
in Czechoslovakia: a regional study". Int. J. Biometeorology 37(2): 68-71.
Dimitrov, B.D., 1999: "Malignant Melanoma of the skin and Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in USA: a
comparative epidemiological study". Folia Med (Plovdiv) 41(1): 121-125.
Dimitrov, B.D., 1999a: "Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in US children: biometeorological approach".
Folia Med (Plovdiv) 41(1): 29-33.
Dollins, A.B., Zhdanova, I.V., Wurtman, R.J., Lynch, H.J. and Deng, M.H., 1994: "Effect of
inducing nocturnal serum melatonin concentrations in daytime on sleep, mood, body
temperature and performance". Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 91(5): 1824-1828.
Doronin, V.N., Parfentev, V.A., Tleulin, S.Zh,, Namvar, R.A., Somsikov, V.M., Drobzhev, V.I. and
Chemeris, A.V., 1998: "Effect of variations of the geomagnetic field and solar activity on
human physiological indicators". Biofizika 43(4): 647-653.
Dugovic, C., Leyson, J.E. and Wauquier, A., 1991: "Serotonin and sleep in the rat: the role of
5HT2 receptors". In Serotonin and sleep disorder, Ed C. Idzikowski and P.J. Cowen, Publ.
Wrightson Biomedical Publishing Co. Petersfield, U.K.
Elliot, W.H. and Elliot, D.C., 1997: "Biochemistry and molecular biology". Publ. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Feychting, M., Schulgen, G., Olsen J.H. and Ahlbom, A., 1995: "Magnetic fields and childhood
cancer- a poled analysis of two Scandinavian studies". European J of Cancer, 12: 20352039.
Feychting, M., Floderous, B. and Ahlbom, A., 2000: "Parental occupational exposure to magnetic
fields and childhood cancer (Sweden)". Cancer Causes Control 11(2): 151-156.
Frey, A.H., 1995: "On the nature of electromagnetic field interactions with biological systems".
Publ. Springer-Verlag, New York and R.G. Landes Co, Austin.
Garcia-Maurino, S., Pozo, D., Carrillo-Vico, A., Calvo, J.R. and Guerrero, J.M., 1999: "Melatonin
activates Th1 lymphocytes by increasing IL-12 production". Life Sci 65(20): 2143-2150.
Gavalas-Medici, R. and Day-Magdaleno, S.R., 1976: "Extremely low frequency, weak electric
fields affect schedule controlled behaviour of monkeys". Nature (London) 261: 256-258.
Ghione, S., Mezzasalma, L., Del Seppia, C. and Papi, F., 1998: "Do geomagnetic disturbances of
solar origin affect arterial blood pressure?". J. Hum Hypertension, 12(11): 749-754.
Graham, C., Cook, M.R., Cohen, H.D. and Gerkovich, M.M., 1994: "A dose response study of
human exposure to 60Hz electric and magnetic fields". Bioelectromagnetics 15: 447-463.
Graham, C., Cook, M.R., Sastre, A., Riffle, D.W. and Gerkovich, M.M., 2000: "Multi-night
exposure to 60 Hz magnetic fields: effects on melatonin and its enzymatic metabolite". J
Pineal Res 28(1): 1-8.
Guardiola-Lemaitre, B., 1998: "Development of animal models for the chronobiotics of melatonin
analogs". Therapie 53(5): 439-444.

44

Gurfinkel' IuI, Liubimov, VV., Oraevskii, V.N., Parfenova, L.M. and Iur'ev, A.S., 1995: "The effect
of geomagnetic disturbances in capillary blood flow in ischemic heart disease patients"
Biofizika 40(4): 793-799.
Haigh, J.D., 1996: "The impact of solar variability on climate". Science 272: 981-984.
Hamburger, S., Logue, J.N., and Sternthal, P.M., 1983: "Occupational exposure to non-ionizing
radiation and an association with heart disease: an exploratory study". J Chronic Diseases
36: 791-802.
Hamer, J.R., 1965 :Biological entrainment of the human brain by low frequency radiation". NSL
65-199, Northrop Space Labs.
Hamer, J.R., 1969: "Effects of low level, low frequency electric fields on time judgement". Fifth
Intern. Biometeorological Congress, Montreaux, Switzerland.
Hardell, L., Holmberg, B., Malker, H., and Paulsson, L.E., 1995: "Exposure to extremely low
frequency electromagnetic fields and the risk of malignant diseases--an evaluation of
epidemiological and experimental findings". Eur. J. Cancer Prevention, Suppl 1:3-107.
Hargreaves J.K., 1992 "The Solar-terrestrial environment", Publ. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Hicks, N., Zack, M., Caldwell, G.G., Fernbach, D.J. and Falletta, J.M., 1984: "Childhood cancer
and occupational radiation exposure in parents". Cancer 53(8): 1637-1643.
Hunt, A.E., Al-Ghoul, W.M., Gillette, M.U. and Dubocovich, M.L., 2001: "Activation of MT(2)
melatonin receptors in rat suprachiasmatic nucleus phase advances the circadian clock".
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 280(1): C110-118.
Ishida, N., Kaneka, M. and Allada, R., 1999: "Biological clocks". Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 96: 88198820.
Jenrow,, K.A., Smith, C.H. and Liboff, A.R., 1996: "Weak extremely low frequency magnetic
fields-induced regeneration anomalies in Planarian Dugesia tigrina". Bioelectromagnetics
17: 467-474.
Johansen, C., Kock-Henriksen, N., Rasmussen, S. and Olsen, J.H., 1999: "Multiple Sclerosis
among utility workers". Neurology 52: 1279-1282.
Johansen, C., 2000: "Exposure to electromagnetic fields and risk of central nervous system
disease in utility workers". Epidemiology 11(5): 539-543.
Johnson, C.C. and Spitz, M.R., 1989: "Childhood nervous system tumors: an assessment of risk
associated with parental occupations involving the use, repair or manufacture of electrical
and electronic equipment". Int J Epidemiol 18(4): 756-762.
Juutilainen, J., Matilainen, P., Saarikoski, S., Laara, E. and Suonio, S., 1993: "Early pregnancy
loss and exposure to 50 Hz magnetic fields". Bioelectromagnetics, 14(3): 229-236.
Juutilainen, J., Stevens, R.G., Anderson, L.E., Hansen, N.H., Kilpelainen, M., Laitinen, J.T.,
Sobel, E. and Wilson, B.W., 2000: "Nocturnal 6-hydroxymelatonin sulphate excretion in
female workers exposed to magnetic fields". J Pineal Res 28(2): 97-104.

45
Kallen, B., Malmquist, G., and Moritz, U., 1982: “Delivery Outcome among Physiotherapists in
Sweden: is Non-ionizing Radiation a Fetal Hazard? Archives of Environmental Health,
37(2): 81-84.
Kandel, E.R., Schwartz, J.H. and Jessell, J.M., 2000: "Principles of Neural Science". Publ.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Karasek, M., Woldanska-Okonska, M., Czernicki, J., Zylinska, K. and Swietoslawski, J., 1998:
"Chronic exposure to 2.9 mT, 40 Hz magnetic field reduces melatonin concentrations in
humans". J. Pineal Rese., 25(4): 240-244.
Karlov, V.A., Selitskii, G.V. and Sorokina, N.D., 1996: "The action of a magnetic field on the
bioelectrical activity of the brain in healthy subjects and epilepsy patients". Zh Nevropatol
Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 96(2) :54-58.
Kaczmarek, L.K. and Adey, W.R., 1973: "The efflux of 45 Ca 2+ and 3H-gamma-aminobutyric
acid from the cat cerebral cortex". Brain Res 63: 331-342.
Kay, R.W., 1994: "Geomagnetic Storms: association with incidence of depression as measured
by hospital admission". Br J Psychiatry 164(3): 403-409.
Kerut, E.K., McKinnie, J.J. and Giles, T.D., 1999: "Modern evaluation of the hypertensive patient:
autonomic tone in cardiovascular disease and assessment of heart rate variability". Blood
Press Monit 4(Suppl 1): S7-S14.
King, G.A.M. and Lawden, M.D., 1962: "Variations of some ionospheric parameters over a solar
cycle". J Atmos Terrest Physics 24: 565-568.
Knox, E.G., Armstrong, E., Lancashire, R., Wall, M. and Hayes, R., 1979: "Heart attacks and
geomagnetic activity". Nature 281 (18 October 1979): 564-565.
Kolodynski, A.A. and Kolodynska, V.V., 1996: “Motor and psychological functions of school
children living in the area of the Skrunda Radio Location Station in Latvia”. The Science of
the Total Environment, Vol 180, pp 87-93.
Komarov, F.I., Oraevskii, V.N., Sizov, Iu.P., Tsirul'nik, L.B., Kanoidi, Kh.D., Ushakov, I.B.,
Shalimov, P.M., Kimlyk, M.V., and Glukhov,.D.V., 1998: "Heliogeophysical factors and
aviation accidents". Biofizika, 43(4): 742-745.
König, H.L., 1974a: “ELF and VLF signal properties: physical characteristics". In “ELF and VLF
electromagnetic field effects”, M.A. Persinger Ed, Publ. Plenum Press, New York.
König, H.L., 1974b: “Behavioural changes in human subjects associated with ELF electric fields”.
In “ELF and VLF electromagnetic field effects”, M.A. Persinger Ed, Publ. Plenum Press,
New York.
Kopanev, V.I., Efimenko, G.D. and Shakula, A.V., 1979: "Biological effect of a hypogeomagnetic
environment on an organism". Biol Bull Acad Sci USSR 6(3): 289-298.
Larsen, A.I., Olsen, J., and Svane, O., 1991: "Gender specific reproductive outcome and
exposure to high frequency electromagnetic radiation among physiotherapists". Scand. J.
Work Environ. Health, Vol.17, pp 324-329.
Maestroni, G.J., 1995: "T-Helper-2 Lymphocytes as peripheral target of melatonin signalling". J
Pineal Res 18: 84-89.

46

Makarov, L.M., 1998: "Role of geomagnetic field in development of biorhythm profile of venticular
arrhythmia onset". Klin. Med. (Mosk), 76(6):31-35.
Makarova, I.I., 2000: "Geomagnetic effects on cortico-caudal mechanisms of auditory stimuli
processing in cats". Aviakosm Ekolog Med 34(3) :47-51.
Malin, S. R.C. and Srivastava, B.J., 1979: "Correlation between heart attacks and magnetic
activity". Nature 277 (22 Feb 1979): 646-648.
Malmivuo, J. and Plonsey, R., 1995: "Bioelectromagnetism: Principles and applications of
bioelectric and biomagnetic fields". Publ. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, England.
Matsushita, S. and Campbell, W.H., 1967: "Physics of geophysical phenomena". Academic Press,
New York.
Michon, A., Koren, S.A. and Persinger, M.A., 1996: "Attempts to simulate the association between
geomagnetic activity and spontaneous seizures in rats using experimentally generated
magnetic fields". Percept Mot Skills 82(2): 619-626.
Mikulecky, M., Moravcikova, C. and Czanner, S., 1996: "Lunisolar tidal waves, geomagnetic
activity and epilepsy in the light of multivariate coherence". Braz J Med Biol Res 29(8):
1069-1072.
Mitre, A.P., 1974: "Ionospheric effects of solar flares". Publ. D. Reidel Publi, Co. Boston, U.S.A.
Naitoh, N., Watanabe, Y., Matsumura, K., Murai, I., Kobayashi, K., Imai-Matsumura, K., Ohtuka,
H., Takagi, K., Miyake, Y., Satoh, K. and Watanabe, Y., 1998: "Alteration by maternal
pinealectomy of fetal and neonatal melatonin and dopamine D1 receptor binding in the
suprachaismatic neclei". Biochem Biophys Res Commun 253(3): 850-854.
Nicholaenka, A.P., Hayakawa, M. and Hobara, Y., 1996: "Temporal variations of the global
lightning activity deduced from the Schumann resonance data". J. Atmosph Terrest
Physics 58(15): 1699-1709.
Nicolet, M. and Aikin, A.C., 1960: "The formation of the D region of the ionosphere". J.
Geophysical Research, 65: 1469-1483.
Nikolaev, Y.S., Rudakov, Y.Y., Mansurov, S.M. and Mansurova, L.G., 1976: "Interplanetary
magnetic field sector structure and disturbances of the central nervous system activity".
Reprint N 17a, Acad. Sci USSR, 29pp, IZMIRAN, Moscow.
Novikova, K.F. and Ryvkin, B.A., 1977: "Solar activity and cardiovascular diseases". In "Effects of
solar Activity on the Earth's Atmosphere and Biosphere". M.N.. Gnevyshev and A.I. Ol' ,
eds. Pp 184-200, Acad. Sci. USSR, English trans, Israel Prog. Sci. Trans, Jerusalem.
O'Connor, R.P. and Persinger, M.A., 1996: Increases in geomagnetic activity associated with
increases in thyroxine levels in a single patient: implications for melatonin levels".
International Journal of Neuroscience, 88(3-4): 243-247.
O'Connor, R.P. and Persinger, M.A., 1997: "Geophysical variables and behavior LXXXII. Strong
association between sudden infant death syndrome and increments of global geomagnetic
activity - possible support for the melatonin hypothesis". Percept. Mot. Skills, 84(2): 395402.

47
O'Connor, R.P. and Persinger, M.A., 1999: "Geophysical variables and behavior: LXXXV. Sudden
infant death, bands of geomagnetic activity, and pcl (0.2-5 Hz) geomagnetic
micropulsations". Percept Mot Skills, 88(2): 391-397.
Olshan, A.F., De Roos, A.J., Teschke, K., Neglia, J.P., Stram, D.O., Pollock, B.H. and
Castleberry, R.P., 1999: "Neuroblastoma and parental occupation". Cancer Causes
Control 10(6): 539-549.
Oraevskii, V.N., Kuleshova, V.P., Gurfinkel', Iu.F., Guseva, A.V., and Rapoport, S.I., 1998a:
"Medico-biological effect of natural electromagnetic variations". Biofizika, 43(5): 844-888.
Oraevskii, V.N., Breus, T.K., Baevskii, R.M., Rapoport, S.I., Petrov, V.M., Barsukova, Zh.V.,
Gurfinkel' IuI, and Rogoza, A.T., 1998b: "Effect of geomagnetic activity on the functional
status of the body". Biofizika 43(5): 819-826.
Osborne, N.N., 1994: "Serotonin and melatonin on the iris/ciliary processes and their involvement
in intraocular pressure". Acta Neurobiolo Exp (Warsz) 54 Suppl: 57-64.
Otto, W., Hempel, W.E., Wagner, C.U. and Best, A., 1982: "Various periodical and aperiodical
variations of heart infarct mortality in the DRG". [In German], Z Gesamte Inn Med 37(22):
756-763.
Ouellet-Hellstrom, R. and Stewart, W.F., 1993: “Miscarriages among Female Physical Therapists
who report using radio- and microwave- frequency electromagnetic radiation.” American J.
of Epidemiology, 138 (10): 775-86.
Pang, S.F., Li, L., Ayre, E.A., Pang, C.S., Lee, P.P., Xu, R.K., Chao, P.H., Yu, Z.H. and Shiu,
S.Y., 1998: "Neuroendocrinology of melatonin in reproduction: recent developments". J
Chem Neuroanat 14(3-4): 157-166.
Perry, F.S., Reichmanis, M., Marino, A. and Becker, R.O., 1981: "Environmental power-frequency
magnetic fields and suicide". Health Phys 41(2): 267-277.
Persinger, M.A., Richards, P.M. and Koren, S.A., 1994: "Differential ratings of pleasantness
following right and left hemispheric application of low energy magnetic fields that stimulate
long-term potentiation". Int J Neurosci 79(3-4): 191-197.
Persinger, M.A., 1995: "Sudden unexpected death in epileptics following sudden, intense,
increases in geomagnetic activity: prevalence of effect and potential mechanisms". Int J
Biometeorol 38(4):180-187.
Persinger, M.A., 1995a: "Geophysical variables and behavior: LXXIX. Overt limbic seizures are
associated with concurrent and premidscotophase geomagnetic activity: synchronization
by prenocturnal feeding". Percept Mot Skills 81(1): 83-93.
Persinger, M.A. and Richards, P.M., 1995: "Vestibular experiences of humans during brief periods
of partial sensory deprivation are enhanced when daily geomagnetic activity exceeds 1520 nT". Neurosci Lett 194(1-2): 69-72.
Persinger, M.A., 1997: "Geomagnetic variables and behavior: LXXXIII. Increased geomagnetic
activity and group aggression in chronic limbic epileptic male rats". Percept Mot Skills 85(3
Pt 2):1376-1378.
Persinger, M.A., 1999: "Wars and increased solar-geomagnetic activity: aggression or change in
intraspecies dominance?". Percept Mot Skills 88(3 Pt 2): 1351-1355.

48
Petrichuk, S.V., Faitinova, A.A., Shishchenko, V.M. and Nartsissov, R.P., 1992: "Modulation of
energy metabolism of lymphocytes in children by natural physical factors". Biofizika 37(4):
720-728.
Petrichuk, S.V., Shishchenko, V.M., Dukhova, Z.N., Gaitinova, A.A., Nartsissov, R.P. and Sizov,
IuP., 1998: "Effect of natural physical factors of the environment on the condition of
pregnant women with normal pregnancy". Biofizika 43(5): 853-856.
Pfluger, D.M. and Minder, C.E., 1996: "Effects of 16.7 Hz magnetic fields on urinary 6hydroxymelatonin sulfate excretion of Swiss railway workers". J Pineal Research 21(2):
91-100.
Pikin, D.A., Gurginkel', Iu.I. and Oraevskii, V.N., 1998: "Effect of geomagnetic disturbances on the
blood coagulation system in patients with ischemic heart disease and prospects for
correction medication". [In Russian]. Biofizika, 43(4): 617-622.
Polk, C., 1982: "Schumann Resonances". In CRC Handbook of Atmospherics, Vol 1, pp 111-177,
Polikarpov, N.A., 1996: "The relationship of the indices of solar-geomagnetic activity and the
autofluctuations in the biological properties of Staphylococcus aureus 209 subcultures in
vitro". [Article in Russian] Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol (1):27-30.
Poon, A.M., Liu, Z.M., Pang, C.S., Brown, G.M. and Pang, S.F., 1994: "Evidence for a direct
action of melatonin on the immune system". Biol Signals 3(2): 107-117.
Ptitsyna, N.G., Villoresi, G., Kopytenko, Y.A., Kudrin, V.A., Tyasto, M.I., Kopytenko, E.A., Iucci,
N., Voronov, P.M.. and Zaitsev, D.B., 1996" "Coronary heart diseases: assessment of
risck associated with work exposure to ultalow-frequency magnetic fields".
Bioelectromagnetics 17(6): 436-444.
Rajaram, M. and Mitra, S., 1981: "Correlation between convulsive seizure and geomagnetic
activity". Neurosci. Lett., 24(2): 187-191.
Rapoport, S.I., Malinovskaia, N.K., Oraevskii, V.N., Komarov, F.I., Nosovskii, A.M. and
Vetterberg, L., 1997: "Effects of disturbances of natural magnetic field of the Earth on
melatonin production in patients with coronary heart disease". Klin Med (Mosk) 75(6): 2426.
Rapoport, S.I., Blodypakova, T.D., Malinovskaia, N.K., Oraevskii, V.N., Meshcheriakova, S.A.,
Breus, T.K. and Sosnovskii, A.M., 1998: "Magnetic storms as a stress factor". Biofizika
43(4): 632-639.
Rapoport, S.I., Shalalova, A.M., Oraevskii, V.N., Malinovskaia, N.K., and Vetterberg, L., 2001:
"Melatonin production in hypertonic patients during magnetic storms". Ter Arkh 73(12): 2933.
Raps, A., Stoupel, E., and Shimshoni, M., 1991: "Solar activity and admissions of psychiatric
inpatients, relations and possible implications of seasonality". Isr. J. Psychiatry Relation.
Sci., 28(2): 50-59.
Rawer, K. 1984a: "Modelling of neutral and ionized atmospheres." In: Encyclopaedia of Physics,
Vol 49/7. Springer, New York, 223-250.
Resch, J., 1995: "Geographic distribution of multiple sclerosis and comparison with geophysical
values". Soz Praventivmed 40(3): 161-171.

49
Reiter, R.J., 1994: “Melatonin suppression by static and extremely low frequency electromagnetic
fields: relationship to the reported increased incidence of cancer”. Reviews on
Environmental Health. 10(3-4): 171-86, 1994.
Reiter, R.J., 1995: "Oxidative processes and antioxidative defense mechanisms in the aging
brain". FASEB J 9(7): 526-533.
Riabykh, T.P. and Bodrova, N.B., 1992: "Correlation of the probability of occurrence of breast
neoplasms with solar activity". Biofizika, 37(4): 710-715.
Reiter, R.J. and Robinson, J, 1995: "Melatonin: Your body's natural wonder drug". Publ. Bantam
Books, New York.
Renton, C.M. and Persinger, M.A., 1997: "Elevations of complex partial epileptic-like experiences
during increased geomagnetic activity for women reporting "pre-menstral syndrome".
Percept. Mot. Skills, 86(1):240-242.
Robinette, C.D., Silverman, C. and Jablon, S., 1980: “Effects upon health of occupational
exposure to microwave radiation (radar)”. American Journal of Epidemiology, 112(1):3953, 1980.
Robson, J., 1967: "Basic Tables in Physics". Publ. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Rosen, L.A., Barber, I. and Lyle D.B., 1998: "A 0.5 G, 60 HZ magnetic field suppresses melatonin
production in pinealocytes". Bioelectromagnetics 19: 123-127.
Salo, T.M., Jula, A.M., Fiha, J.S., Kantola, I.M., Pelttari, L., Rauhala, E., Metsala, T.M., Jalonen,
J.O., Viopoi-Pulkki, L.M. and Viikari, J.S., 2000" :Comparison of autonomic withdrawal in
men with onstructive sleep apnea syndrome, systemic hypotension, and neither
condition". Am J Cardiol 85(2):232-238.
Sandodze V.I., Svanidze, I.K. and Didimova, E.V., 1995: "Effects of hypomagnetic fields on
motility of the cilia of ependymal cells in vivo". Radiats Biol Radioecol 35(1): 19-22.
Sandyk, R. 1992: "Alpha rhythm and the pineal gland". Int J Neurosci 63(3-4): 221-227.
Sandyk, R. and Anninos, P.A., 1992a: "Attenuation of epilepsy with application of external
magnetic fields: a case report". Int J Neurosci 66(1-2): 75-85.
Sandyk, R. and Anninos, P.A., 1992b: "Magnetic fields alter the circadian periodicity of seizures".
Int J Neurosci 63 (3-4): 265-274.
Sandyk, R., 1994: "Improvement in word-fluency performance in Parkinson's disease by
administration of electromagnetic fields". Int. J Neurosci 77(1-2): 23-46.
Sandyk R., 1996: "Brief communication: electromagnetic fields improve visuospatial performance
and reverse agraphia in a Parkinsonian patient". Int J Neurosci. 87(3-4): 209-17.
Satori, G., 1996: "Monitoring Schumann Resonances - I Methodology". J. Atmos. Terrest. Physics
58(13): 1475-1481.
Sandyk R, 1997: "Immediate recovery of cognitive functions and resolution of fatigue by treatment
with weak electromagnetic fields in a patient with multiple sclerosis". Int J Neurosci. 90(12):59-74.

50
Sandyk, R., 1997a: "Speech impairment in Parkinson's disease is improved by transcranial
application of electromagnetic fields". Int J Neurosci. 92(1-2): 63-72.
Sandyk, R., 1997b: "Treatment with AC pulsed electromagnetic fields improves the response to
levodopa in Parkinson's disease". Int J Neurosci. 91(3-4): 189-97.
Sandyk, R. 1997c: "Reversal of cognitive impairment in an elderly Parkinsonian patient by
transcranial application of picotesla electromagnetic fields". Int J Neurosci. 91(1-2): 57-68.
Sandyk, R., 1997d: "Treatment with weak electromagnetic fields restores dream recall in a
parkinsonian patient". Int J Neurosci. 90(1-2): 75-86.
Sandyk, R., 1997e: "Treatment with electromagnetic fields improves dual-task performance
(talking while walking) in multiple sclerosis". Int J Neurosci. 92(1-2): 95-102.
Sandyk, R., 1997f: "Treatment with electromagnetic fields reverses the long-term clinical course
of a patient with chronic progressive multiple sclerosis". Int J Neurosci. 90(3-4): 177-85.
Sandyk, R., 1997g: "Resolution of sleep paralysis by weak electromagnetic fields in a patient with
multiple sclerosis". Int J Neurosci. 90(3-4): 145-57.
Sandyk, R., 1997h: "Therapeutic effects of alternating current pulsed electromagnetic fields in
multiple sclerosis". J Altern Complement Med. 3(4): 365-86.
Sandyk, R., 1997i: "Role of the pineal gland in multiple sclerosis: a hypothesis". J Altern
Complement Med. 3(3): 267-90.
Sandyk, R., 1997j: "Reversal of a visuoconstructional disorder by weak electromagnetic fields in a
child with Tourette's syndrome". Int J Neurosci. 90(3-4): 159-67.
Sandyk, R., 1998a: "Reversal of a body image disorder (macrosomatognosia) in Parkinson's
Disease by treatment with AC pulsed electromagnetic fields". Int J Neurosci. 93(1-2):4354.
Sandyk, R., 1998b:"Treatment with AC pulsed electromagnetic fields normalizes the latency of the
visual evoked response in a multiple sclerosis patient with optic atrophy". Int J Neurosci.
93(3-4): 239-50.
Sandyk, R., 1998c: "Transcranial AC pulsed applications of weak electromagnetic fields reduces
freezing and falling in progressive supranuclear palsy: a case report". Int J Neurosci.
94(1-2): 41-54.
Sandyk, R., 1999a: "Yawning and stretching induced by transcranial application of AC pulsed
electromagnetic fields in Parkinson's disease". Int J Neurosci. 97(1-2): 139-45.
Sandyk, R.,1999b: "AC pulsed electromagnetic fields-induced sexual arousal and penile erections
in Parkinson's disease". Int J Neurosci. 99(1-4): 139-49.
Sandyk, R., 1999c: "Treatment with AC pulsed electromagnetic fields improves olfactory function
in Parkinson's disease". Int J Neurosci. 97(3-4): 225-33.
Sandyk, R. 1999d: "Impairment of depth perception in multiple sclerosis is improved by treatment
with AC pulsed electromagnetic fields". Int J Neurosci. 98(1-2): 83-94.
Sastre, A., Cook, M.R. and Graham, C., 1998: "Nocturnal exposure to intermittent 60 Hz magnetic
fields alters human cardiac rhythm". Bioelectromagnetics 19: 98-106.

51

Satori, G., 1996: "Monitoring Schumann Resonances - II Daily and Seasonal frequency
variations". J. Atmos. Terrest. Physics 58(13): 1483-1488.
Savitz, D.A,, Loomis, D.P. and Tse, C.K., 1998: "Electrical occupations and neurodegenerative
disease: analysis of U.S. mortality data". Arch Environ Health 53(1): 71-74.
Savitz, D.A., Liao, D., Sastre, A., Kleckner, R.C. and Kavet, R., 1999: "Magnetic field exposure
and cardiovascular disease mortality among electric utility workers". Am. J. Epid. 149(20:
135-142.
Savitz, D.A., Liao, D., Sastre, A., Kleckner, R.C. and Kavet, R., 1999a: Re: "Magnetic field
exposure and cardiovascular disease mortality among electric utility workers". The authors
reply. Am. J. Epid. 150(11): 1258-1259.
Savitz, D.A., Cai, J., Van Wijngaarden, E., Loomis, D., Mihlan, G., Dufort, V., Kleckner, R.C.,
Nylander-French, L. Kromhout, H. and Zhou, H., 2000: Am J Indd Med 38(4): 417-425.
Schneggenburger, R. and Neher, E., 2000: "Intracellular calcium dependence of transmitter
release rates at a fast central synapse". Nature 406(6798): 889-93.
Schumann, W.O., 1952: "Uber de strahlundslosen Eigenschwingungen einer leitenden Kugel, die
von einer Luftschicht und einer Ionospharenhulle umgeben ist". Z. Naturforsch 7a 149.
Schumann, W.O. and König, H.L., 1954: " Uber die beobachtung von atmospherics bei geringsten
frequenzen". Naturwissenschaften, 41: 183.
Schwartz, J.L., House, D.E., and Mealing, A.R., 1990: “Exposure of frog hearts to CW or
amplitude modulated VHF fields: selective efflux of calcium ions at 16 Hz.”
Bioelectromagnetics 11: 349-358.
SEAMIC 1997: "Recent trends in health statistics in Southeast Asia 1974-1993". Publication No.
77, Southeast Asian Medical Information Center, Tokyo.
Selitskii, G.V., Karlov, V.A. and Sorokina, N.D., 1999: "The influence of hypogeomagnetic field on
the bioelectric activity of the brain in epilepsy". Zh. Nevrol. Psikhiatr. Im. S.S. Korsakova.,
99(4): 48-50.
Sentman, D.D. and Fraser, B.J., 1991: "Simultaneous observations of Schumann Resonances in
California and Australia: Evidence for intensity modulation by local height of the D
Region". J. Geophysical Res. 96(A9): 15973-15984.
Sitar, J., 1990: "The causality of lunar changes on cardiovascular mortality". [In Czech.] Cas. Lek.
Cesk. 129(45):1425-1430.
Smulevich, V.B., Solionova, L.G. and Belyakova, S.V., 1999: "Parental occupation and other
factors and cancer risk in children II". Int J Cancer 83(60: 718-722,
Shumilov, O.I., Kasatkina, E.A. and Raspopov, O.M., 1998: "Heliomagnetic activity and level of
extreme situations at the Polar cap" [In Russian] Biofizika 43(4): 670-676.
Sobel, E., Davanipour, Z., Sulkava, R., Erkinjuntti, T., Wikstrom, J., Henderson, V.W., Bucjwalter,
G., Bowman, D. and Lee, P-J., 1995: "Occupations with exposure to electromagnetic
fields: a possible risk factor for Alzheimer’s Disease". Am J Epidemiol 142(5): 515-524.

52
Sobel, E., Dunn, M., Davanipour, D.V.M., Qian, M.S. and Chui, M.D., 1996: "Elevated risk of
Alzheimer’s disease among workers with likely electromagnetic field exposure. Neurology
47(12): 1477-1481.
Sparks, D.L. and Hunsaker, J.C., 1988: "The pineal gland in sudden infant death syndrome:
preliminary observations". J Pineal Res 5: 111-118.
Spitz, M.R. and Johnson, C.C., 1985: "Neuroblastoma and parental occupation. A case-control
analysis". Am J Epidemiol 121(6): 924-929.
Sprott, J.C., 1990: "Numerical recipes: Routines and examples in Basic". Publ. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Stark, K.D.C., Krebs, T., Altpeter, E., Manz, B., Griol, C. and Abelin, T., 1997: "Absence of chronic
effect of exposure to short-wave radio broadcast signal on salivary melatonin
concentrations in dairy cattle". J Pineal Research 22: 171-176.
Stewart, W., 2000: "Mobile phones and health" Independent Expert Group on Mobile Phones,
(IEGMP) U.K. Parliamentary Enquiry, London.
Stoupel, E., Hod, M., Shimshoni, M., Friedman, S., Ovadia, J. and Keith, L., 1990: "Monthly
cosmic activity and pregnancy induced hypertension". Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 17(1): 712.
Stoupel, E., Martfel, J. and Rotenberg, Z., 1991: "Admissions of patients with epileptic seizures
(E) and dizziness (D) related to geomagnetic and solar activity levels: differences in
female and male patients". Med. Hypothesis, 36(4): 384-388.
Stoupel, E. and Shimshoni, M., 1991: "Hospital cardiovascular deaths and total distribution of
deaths in 180 consecutive months with difference cosmic physical activity: a correlation
study (1974-1988)". Int. J. Biometeorology 35(1): 6-9.
Stoupel, E., 1993: "Sudden cardiac deaths and ventricular extrasystoles on days of four levels of
geomagnetic activity". J. Basic Physiol. Pharmacol., 4(4): 357-366.
Stoupel, E., Goldenfeld, M., Shimshoni, M. and Siegel, R., 1993: "Intraocular pressure (IOP) in
relation to four levels of daily geomagnetic and extreme yearly solar activity". Int. J.
Biometeorology, 37(1): 42-45.
Stoupel, E., Martfel, J.N., and Rotenberg, Z., 1994: "Paroxysmal atrial fibrulation and stroke
(cerebrovasular accidents) in males and females above and below the age 65 on days of
different geomagnetic activity levels". J. Basic. Clin. Physiol. Pharmacol., 5(3-4): 315-329.
Stoupel, E., Abramson, E., Sulkes, J., Martfel, J., Stein, N., Handelman, M., Shimshoni, M.,
Zadka, P. and Gabbay, U., 1995a: "Relationship between suicide and myocardial
infarction with regard to changing physical environmental conditions". Int J Biometeorol
38(4): 199-203
Stoupel, E., Petrauskiene, J., Kalediene, R., Abramson, E. and Sulkes, J., 1995b: "Clinical
cosmobiology: the Lithuanian study 1990-1992". Int. J. Biometeorology, 38(4): 204-208.
Stoupel, E., Petrauskiene, J., Kalediene, R., Domarkiene, S., Abramson, E. and Sulkes, J., 1996:
"Distribution of deaths from ischemic heart disease and stroke. Environmental and aging
influences in men and women". J. Basic. Clinical Physiol. Pharmacol., 7(4): 303-319.

53
Stoupel, E., Abramson, J., Domarkiene, S., Shimshoni, M. and Sulkes, J., 1997: "Space proton
flux and the temporal distribution of cardiovascular deaths". Int J Biometeorol 40(2): 113116.
Stoupel, E., Petrauskiene, J., Abramson, E., Kalediene, R., Israelovich, P. and Sulkes, J., 1999:
"Relationship between deaths from stroke and ischemic heart disease: Environmental
implications". J. Basic. Clinical Physiol. Pharmacol., 10(2): 135-145.
St Pierre, L. and Persinger, M.A., 1998: "Geophysical variables and behavior: LXXXIV.
Quantitative increases in group aggression in male epileptic rats during increases in
geomagnetic activity". Percept. Mot. Skills, 86(3 Pt2):1392-1394.
Svanidze, I.K., Sandodze, V.Ia., Didimova, E.V., Chkhikvadze, T.I., Portnoi, V.N. and Razdol'skii,
A.S., 1994: "The effect of hypo- and hypermagnetic fields on the motor activity of the
ciliary apparatus of the ependymal cells". [Article in Russian]. Radiats. Biol. Radioecol.,
34(1): 100-104 .
Szmigielski, S., 1996: “Cancer morbidity in subjects occupationally exposed to high frequency
(radiofrequency and microwave) electromagnetic radiation”. Science of the Total
Environment, Vol 180, 1996, pp 9-17.
Tambiev, A.E., Medvedev, S.D. and Egorova, E.V., 1995: "The effect of geomagnetic
disturbances on the functions of attention and memory". [In Russian]. Aviakosm. Ekolog.
Med., 29(3): 43-45.
Tang, Y. and Othmer, H.G., 1995: "Frequency encoding in excitable systems with applications to
calcium oscillations". Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 92(17): 7869-7873.
Taskinen, H., Kyyronen, P., and Hemminki, K., 1990: “Effects of ultrasound, shortwaves and
physical exertion on pregnancy outcome in physiotherapists”. J. of Epidemiology and
Community Health, 44:196-210.
Tell, R.A. and Mantiply, E.D., 1980: "Population exposure to VHF and UHF broadcast radaition in
the United States". Proc IEEE 68(1): 4-10.
Tran, A. and Polk, C., 1979: "Schumann resonances and electrical conductivity of the atmosphere
and lower ionosphere- I. Effects of conductivity at various altitudes on resonance
frequencies and attenuation". J Atmos Terrest Physics 41: 1241-1248.
Thomas, L., Drew, J.E., Abramovich, D.R. and Williams, L.M., 1998: "The role of melatonin in the
human fetus". Int J Mol Med 1(3): 539-543.
Titheridge, J.E., 1962: "The electron density in the lower ionosphere". J Atmosph and Terr Phys
24: 269-282
Tunyi, I. And Tesarova, O., 1991: "Suicide and geomagnetic activity". [In Slovak]. Soud. Lek.
36(1-2): 1-11.
Tynes, T., Reitan, J.B. and Andersen, A., 1994: "Incidence of cancer among workers in
Norwegian hydroelectric power companies", Scan J Work Environ Health 20(5): 339-344.
Usenko, G.A., 1992: "Psychosomatic status and the quality of the piloting in fliers during
geomagnetic disturbances". Aviakosm. Ekolog. Med., 26(4): 23-27.
Vagero, D., Ahlbom, A., Olin, R. and Sahlsten, S., 1985: "cancer morbidity among workers in the
telecommunication industry". Br J Ind Med 42: 191-195.

54

Van Wijngaarden, E., Savitz, D.A., Kleckner, R.C., Cai, J. and Loomis, D., 2000: "Exposure to
electromagnetic fields and suicide among electric utility workers: a nested case-control
study". Occup Environ Med 57: 258-263.
Vanecek, J., 1998: "Cellular mechanisms of melatonin action". Physiol Rev 78(3): 687-721.
Vaughan, T.L., Daling, J.R. and Starzyk, P.M., 1984: "Fetal death and maternal occupation". J.
Occup. Med. 676-678.
Verge, D. and Calas, A., 2000: "Serotoninergic neurons and serotonin receptors: gains from
cytochemical approaches". J Chem Neuroanat 18(1-2): 41-56.
Verkasalo, P.K., Kaprio, J., Varjonen, J., Romanov, K., Heikkila, K., and Koskenvuo, M., 1997:
"Magnetic fields of transmission lines and depression". Am. J. Epidemiology, 146(12):
1037-45.
Vignati, M. and Giuliani, L., 1997: “Radiofrequency exposure nerar high-voltage lines”.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 105 (Suppl 6): 1569-1573.
Villoresi, G., Ptitsyna, N.G., Tiasto, M.I. and Iucci, N., 1998: "Myocardial infarct and geomagnetic
disturbances: analysis of data on morbidity and mortality". [In Russian]. Biofizika, 43(4):
623-632.
Viswanathan, M., Laitinen, J.T. and Saavedra, J.M., 1993: "Vascular melatonin receptors". Biol
Signals 2(4): 221-227.
Vriend, J., Borer, K.T. and Thliveris, J.A., 1987: "Melatonin, its antagonism of thyroxine's
antisomatotrophic activity in male Syrian hamsters". Growth 51(1): 35-43.
Wang, S.G. 1989: "5-HT contents change in peripheral blood of workers exposed to microwave
and high frequency radiation". Chung Hua Yu Fang I Hsueh Tsa Chih 23(4): 207-210.
Walleczek, J, 1992: "Electromagnetic field effects on cells of the immune system: the role of
calcium signalling". FASEB J 6(13): 3177-3185.
Watanabe, Y., Hillman, D.C.,, Otsuka, K., Bingham, C., Breus, T.K., Cornelissen, G. and Halberg,
F., 1994: "Cross-spectral coherence between geomagnetic disturbance and human
cardiovascular variables at non-societal frequencies". Chronobiologia 21(3-4):265-272.
Wertheimer, N, and Leeper, E., 1986: "Possible effects of electric blankets and heated waterbeds
on fetal development". Bioelectromagnetics 7:13-22.
Wever, R., 1967: "Uber die Beeinflussung der circadianen Periodik ees Menschen durch
schwache elektromagnetische Felder". Z. vergl Physiol 56: 111-128.
Wever, R., 1968: "Einfluss schwacher elektro-magnetischer Felder auf die circadiane Periodik des
Menschen". Naturwissenschaften 55: 29-32.
Wever, R., 1973: "Human circadian rhythms under the influence of weak electric fields and
different aspects of these studies". Int. J. Biometeorology 17: 227-232.
Wever, R., 1974: “ELF-effects on Human Circadian Rhythms”, pp 101-144 in “ELF and VLF
Electromagnetic Field Effects”, Ed. M.A. Persinger, Publ. Plenum Press, New York.

55
Weydahl, A. Sothern, R.B., Cornelissen, G. and Wetterberg, L., 2001: “Geomagnetic activity
influences the Melatonin secretion at latitude 70 degrees N”. Biomed Parmacother
55(Suppli 1): 57s-62s.
Whitfield, J.F., 1992: "Calcium signals and cancer". Crit Rev Oncolog 3(1-2): 55-90.
Wilkins, J.R. and Hundley, V.D., 1990: "Parental occupational exposure to electromagnetic fields
and neuroblastoma in offspring". Am J Epidemiol 131(6): 995-1008.
Wilkins, J.R. and Wellage, L.C., 1996: "Brain tumor risk in offspring of men occupationally
exposed to electric and magnetic fields". Scand J Work Environ Health 22(5): 339-345.
Williams, E.R., 1992: "The Schumann Resonance: A global tropical thermometer". Science 256
(23 May 1992) 1184-1187.
Wilson, B.W., Wright, C.W., Morris, J.E., Buschbom, R.L., Brown, D.P., Miller, D.L., SommersFlannigan, R. and Anderson, L.E., 1990: "Evidence of an effect of ELF electromagnetic
fields on human pineal gland function". J Pineal Research 9(4): 259-269.
Wood, A.W., Armstrong, S.M., Sait, M.L., Devine, L. and Martin, M.J., 1998: "Changes in human
plasma melatonin profiles in response to 50 Hz magnetic field exposure". J Pineal
Research 25(2): 116-127.
Yaga, K., Reiter, R.J., Manchester, L.C., Nieves, H., Sun, J.H. and Chen L.D., 1993: "Pineal
sensitivity to pulsed static magnetic fields changes during the photoperiod". Brain Res Bull
30(1-2): 153-156.
Zaitseva, S.A. and Pudovkin, M.I., 1995: "Effect of solar and geomagnetic activity on population
dynamics among residents of Russia". [In Russian]. Biofizika, 40(4): 861-864.
Zatz, M., 1989: "Relationship between linght, calcium influx and cAMP in the acute regulation of
melatonin production in cultured chick pineal cells". Brain Res 477: 14-18.
Zawilska, J.B. and Nowak, J.Z., 1990: "Calcium influx through voltage-sensitive calcium channels
regulates in vivo serotonin N-acetyltransferase (NAT) activity in hen retina and pineal
gland". Neurosci Lett 118(1): 17-20.
Zawilska, J.B., Woldan-Tambor, A. and Nowak, J.Z., 1998: "Effects of calcium ions and
substances affecting Ca 2+-regulated mechanisms on histamine-evoked stimulation of
cyclic AMP formation in chick pineal gland". Pol J Pharmacol 50(4-5): 307-314.

