Del Hungerford, D.M.A.
www.healingfrequenciesmusic.com
© 2017 Del Hungerford

Compare and contrast the ancient solfeggio
frequencies with historical facts.
Present a quick timeline of historical musical scales,
tunings and temperament.
Garner a basic understand of the overtone series.
To learn the difference between concert pitch and
temperament
Biographical information on Horowitz and Puleo
Compare/Contrast ancient solfeggio frequencies with
Pythagorean tuning, just intonation and equal
temperament.
Tuning to the ancient solfeggio frequencies

In order to fully understand the ancient solfeggio
frequencies, one must read sheet music.
An advanced level of music theory is a must!
Along with theory, there must be an ability to sight sing
a piece of unknown music.
One must understand the harmonic (overtone) series
and how it works in music.
It’s important to know and understand the difference
between temperament and concert pitch.
There must be a basic understanding of historical
tunings and why they were used.

Many well-known contemporary musicians and other
enthusiasts are agreeing with the Horowitz/Puleo theory
on the ancient solfeggio frequencies.
Various faith-based organizations are putting out videos
quoting the research of Horowitz and Puleo. It’s obvious by
watching their videos that they lack understanding of
temperament, tuning, overtones, and music theory.
Jamie Buturff appears to be one of a few who is providing a
plausible alternative.
Very few of the articles or videos concerning these
frequencies provide accurate historical musical
information.
Roel Hollander (another trained musician) is the only other
accurate source that I can find. (www.roelhollander.eu)

74,000 BC

31,000 BC

3,300 BC

1,500 BC

3-note bone
Neanderthal flute

5-note bone flute
discovered in cave

Sumerian Lyre and
Cuneiform tablets

Pythagoras

Diatonic

Diatonic scale

Modal

Harmonic series

800 AD

1000 AD

1600’s

1800’s

Neume – early
form of western
musical notation

Guido d’Arezzo
invents solfege and
modern musical
notation

Key signatures
require various
tuning

Industrial
Revolution. 12-tone
ET standardized
1870’s – Hz
assigned

Modal

Diatonic/Modal

Diatonic

Diatonic

In the mid-1970’s Dr. Joseph Puleo, a physician and
herbalist, found six electro-magnetic sound
frequencies that corresponded to the syllables from
the hymn to St. John the Baptist.
According to the documentation provided in “Healing
Codes for the Biological Apocalypse,” Dr. Joseph Puleo
was introduced, through an open vision, to the
Pythagorean method of numeral reduction. Using this
method, he discovered the pattern of six repeating
codes in the Book of Numbers 7:12-83.
Source: www.attunedvibrations.com

A retired dentist who affirms himself as being a drug industry
whistleblower and wrote the book “Healing Codes for the
Biological Apocalypse” along with Joseph Puleo.
Says that the “Solfeggio frequencies contain the six pure tonal
notes which were once used to make up the ancient musical
scale, until, it has been presumed, they were altered by the
Catholic Church.”
He is quoted as saying “Our modern day musical scale is slightly
out of sync from the original Solfeggio frequencies and is,
consequently, more dissonant as it is based upon what is termed
the "Twelve-Tone Equal Temperament." In ancient times, the
musical scale was called ‘Just Intonation.’”
My opinion: Based on his videos, Leonard doesn’t understand
musical concepts. His research on drug conspiracy is likely more
accurate than his music research.
Source: www.miraclesandinspiration.com

396 Hz = G
417 Hz = G#
528 Hz = C
639 Hz = E
741 Hz = F#
852 Hz = Ab
(963 Hz = Bb)

UT – 396 Hz – Liberating Guilt and Fear
RE – 417 Hz – Undoing Situations and Facilitating
Change
MI – 528 Hz – Transformation and Miracles (DNA
Repair)
FA – 639 Hz – Connecting/Relationships
SOL – 741 Hz – Expression/Solutions
LA – 852 Hz – Awakening Intuition
"528 cycles per second is literally the core creative
frequency of nature. It is love," proclaims renowned
medical researcher Dr. Leonard G. Horowitz.

Guido d’Arezzo is credited with inventing solfege around 1,000
AD to teach his students how to sight sing plainchant repertoire.
He is also credited with inventing modern musical notation.
Other than a few slight differences, we still use his method of
musical notation today.
We know that Guido used the Pythagorean scale, which is what
the plainchant repertoire is based on.
He put the poem “Hymn to St. John the Baptist” to a little tune
to help his students learn the six note musical scale (much like
Julie Andrews did in The Sound of Music).
Guido would have written the tune on the sheet music as he
heard it.
Pythagorean temperament is very close to 12-tone ET and just
intonation. The “Hymn to Saint John the Baptist” sounds nearly
the same today as it did in Guido’s time.

The ancient solfeggio frequencies are extremely varied in
the distance between each note (temperament).
The scale is extremely different than either Pythagorean,
just, or equal temperament. Some of the intervals between
notes are as small as a half step (minor second) and others
are as large as a major third.
Distance between intervals (temperament) is what creates
a huge discrepancy between the Pythagorean scale and the
ancient solfeggio frequency scale. The ancient solfeggio
frequencies do not fit within any scale known to musical
historians.
There is no evidence of musical instruments, written music,
writings of any kind, or historical artifacts that support the
claims these tones are a lost scale.

If the ancient solfeggio frequencies are indeed a scale
and are musical frequencies, they have only been
around since the middle of the 20th century.
Composers experimented with changing everything we
know about music so… if the angel was showing
Joseph Puleo these frequencies in the Bible, instead of
being ancient, why couldn’t they be something new?
Bible chapter and verse wasn’t around until around
1450 AD – nearly 500 years AFTER Guido died. It would
seem Guido needed these scriptural numbers to “set”
the ancient solfeggio frequency scale.

Because Guido was a monk, he would more than likely NOT
have used scales outside of Pythagorean tuning due to
restrictions on how music could be written (imposed by the
Catholic Church).
As a monk, he would have utilized scales, intervals,
melodies, and harmonies that were dictated by the Pope
himself.
Failure to follow “rules” could have resulted in excommunication from the church. For those who broke
rules, they also got to spend a little time in jail. The ancient
solfeggio frequencies break the allowable rules for scale
and melody writing at the time of Guido.
Scales of this type weren’t used until the 20th century.

Modern musical instruments are made using “equal
temperament.” This will not allow a performer to easily
switch between the solfeggio frequencies.
You must re-tune for each frequency unless your
instrument (usually only electronic keyboards) can also
change temperaments.
Wind and brass instruments can make small
adjustments up (but not generally down) from A=440.
The “violin family” (violin, viola, cello, string bass) can
adjust to a variety of temperaments and tunings.
Fretted instruments (guitar, banjo, etc.) can adjust
tuning but not temperament unless frets are moved.

396 works best at a tuning of A=445. It’s a “G” just above middle
“C.” The exact frequency is 396.45. If you tune to A=444, it will
be quite a bit flat. So, it’s closer to A=445 than A=444.
417 works perfectly with a tuning of A=442. This is the “Gsharp” or “A-flat” just above middle “C.”
528 works perfectly with a tuning of A=444. This is the “C” an
octave above middle “C.”
639 works nearly perfectly at A=452. It’s close to an “E” on the
4th space of the treble clef.
741 works best with a tuning of A=441. It’s the “F-sharp” or “Gflat” on the 5th line of the treble clef. The exact frequency is
741.67 so it will be a bit sharp.
852 works best at A=451. The exact frequency is 851.38 so it will
be a wee bit sharp. It’s an “A-flat” just above the treble clef.

You CAN’T get all the solfeggio frequencies if you tune your
instrument to A=432 or A=444. You must adjust for each
frequency. (See chart in previous slide)
There is NO credible evidence that these frequencies have
anything to do with ancient tuning systems.
Pythagorean and just intonation have been in use as long
as music has been around. Musicians still tune by ear and
are able to make necessary adjustments as needed.
The world switched to 12-tone ET (late 1800’s) so
instruments could play in all 24 major and minor keys.
A=440 concert pitch allowed instrumentalists to play
together no matter where you lived in the world. It has
nothing to do with Hitler waging war on tuning.

If you want to be credible, don’t swallow what’s said on the
Internet. Check the facts before you repeat the information!
Musical intent (the intent of the performer) is very important in
determining how music “feels” to the listener.
There appears to be some evidence that musical frequencies do
have healing properties.
“Entrainment” (matching frequencies between objects) does
appear to be a factor in the healing properties of frequencies.
How the ancient solfeggio frequencies affect the listener all
depends on the intent of the performer.
Thoughts have a frequency and matter has memory. Therefore,
intent can be embedded into music.
For anything to be truly healing, it’s going to require consistency.
Much like taking a prescription drug, any healing protocol will
require regularity.

www.healingfrequenciesmusic.com for more in-depth
articles all things frequency related.
Sign up for the newsletter and receive a free download
of “Beloved Friend” and the “Emotional Roots of
Physical Symptoms” chart.
New information, research studies, information about
the healing properties of music, and all of my music are
available on the website.
My instrumental music is recorded in the A=432 and
A=444 concert pitches along with other tunings.
My music includes standard and EMDR formats.
My music is for sale through my website, iTunes, and
Amazon (downloads and CD’s)

