IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

IGWUBUIKE: UNIFYING ANCIENT COSMOLOGIES IN ORDER TO
UNDERSTAND LIGHT FREQUENCIES AND EVOLUTION OF
CONSCIOUSNESS
Hilary Ugwu
University of Oklahoma
Anne and Henry School of Social Work
Norman Oklahoma
hiugwu@yahoo.com
Abstract
In this work on Igwebuike, I explored the unity of reports by the ancients that in the
beginning of creation there was a cosmic sea of energy. I argued that this sea of energy is
what modern science now identify with dark mater or dark energy. I equally argued that
when the ancients talked about duality especially the fight between evil and good, they
implied anisotropic principles in the cosmos. In this context, anisotropic principle is used
to indicated that the earth, galaxy and the entire cosmos oscillate between light and dark
hemispheres. Just as there is day and night on earth, there is day and night on a grand
cosmic level. This is that is referred to in Sanskrit as Mahavantara and Pralaya There is
period of activity and rest in all reality or organic and inorganic. Manichaeism was right
to a greater extent when it philosophized that there are two eternally co-existing forces in
battle. Although this philosophy offends religions sensibility, nevertheless Manicheanism
was reflecting on the reality of our existence. I have also argued that the separation of the
brain into right and left hemispheres correspond to the greater cosmic hemisphere. I
discussed that creation had beginning. However, in line with the ancient, beginning does
implied ex-nihil. It rather means introducing order in the state of chaos. I indicated that
when the brain is aligned with certain cosmic light frequencies (night) it leads to deevolution. When it is aligned to the right hemisphere of the cosmos it reaches a
synchronistical alignment with balance. When the earth is attuned to the right brain the
Sanskrit call it Sat Yuga, the Golden Age. I did not claim to have covered all necessary
historical changes as a result of the human consciousness downloading waves
corresponding today/night cosmic hemispheres. This paper is limited to go into such
detail. However, this little discussion provided inquisitive researchers platform to delve
further into unpopular research fields not promoted by academic status quo. However, for
the purpose of this study, the Igwebuike method of research was employed.
Keywords: Igwebuike, Cosmologies, Philosophy, Evolution, Consciousness,
Frequencies
Introduction: Making the Argument about the Primordial Beginning

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

70

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

DARK WATERS of the beginning.
Ray, violet, and short, piercing the gloom,
Foreshadow the fire that is dreamed of…
Christopher Okigbo.
Modern science, susceptible to materialistic arrogance, is beginning to catch up
with what the ancients knew and taught thousands of years prior. The ancients
were unanimous in theorizing that in the beginning of the universe there was a
sea of shapeshifting quantum flux. Quantum physics has confirmed this—when
matter is reduced to it subatomic quantum piece, further particle split becomes
impossible. This is because at this nano point of subquantum existence, matter no
longer possess physical density. Rather matter exist in a state of quantum of
light, electrons and protons. Electron has no physical dimensionality due to it
lacks density (Goswami, 1993). The question remains, if at this level matter has
no density, can we still say matter reduced to sub-quanta exist in space and time?
Is matter spirit with holographic manifestation? This is a food for thought.
The ancient referred to the quantum realm of subatomic and atomic vibration as
the ‘primordial waters,” “primordial sea” or “primordial ocean.” The reference
to water, sea or ocean as used by the ancients implies boundless subquantum
energy field, the field of formless changeability. The ancient believed that it was
out of this prime matter that everything was created. What the ancients
identified as primordial water is today called dark matter and dark energy in
quantum physics. The primordial ocean (dark matter/dark energy) permeates
the entire cosmos. The cosmic sea of energy as unified. This is what quantum
physics now call quantum entanglement. The physics of quantum entanglement
has opened a new vista of understanding not just in the areas of physics but also
in the domain of spirituality and consciousness. The ancients are telling us that
there was the existence of infinite void of darkness before anything else. This
makes perfect sense.
It is the attempt to explain the world that led to the emergence of cosmology as a
discipline. Cosmology seeks to explain the origin and nature of the cosmos. The
most contemporary scientific theory traces the beginning of all things to a point
of condensed energy known as singularity. This condensed high temperature
energy combusted in a nuclear explosion and expanded. This is what is referred
to as the Big Bang. With the Big Bang, evolutionary process began— atom, cells,
organisms, planetary globes, heliospheres and galaxies all existing in the cosmos.
Humans have always tried to explain how all these came about using religion,
mythos as well as science.
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

71

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

Scientist conjecture that the universe formed 15 billion years ago, our solar
system 10 billion years ago, the earth 4.6 billion years ago, micro prokaryotic
single cell organism 3.7 billion years ago, human formation was timed at 5.5
million years ago with homo Sapiens Sapiens emerging about 200,000 years ago.
The formation of the galaxies could be summarized thus—high temperature
clouds of massive gas and dust following accretion laws of gravitation and
magnetism started to coalesce into densities. It is these massive densities that we
call galaxies. Galaxies come in different shapes and sizes—elliptical, spiral,
irregular etc. (Houjun Mo et al,2010). Each galaxy contains billions of stars and
span hundreds and thousands of light years across. Distance in space are
calculated in light years. Light year indicate the distance that light travels in one
year. Light travels 180,000 miles (300,000 Kilometers) per second, 11 million
miles (18 million kilometers) in one minute. So, in one years, light would have
traveled 5,600 billion miles (9,000 billion kilometers).
Various religions and spiritual traditions describe creation as an architectural
design of incorporeal divine being or beings. In the case of biblical story, the
creator uttered a word and things were engendered into existence. The vibration
of the voice of God is the Bang in the Big Bang theory (Schroeder,1990). In order
words, creation and the Big Bang theories speak the same language using
different concepts.
This paper is set demonstrate that cosmologies across the world share similar
concepts relative to the origin of all things. The ancients were consistent in
suggesting that in the beginning there was a primordial void of darkness.
Darkness is not nothing. Darkness is something. We see this description
appearing in so many creation myths in ancient hieroglyphics, scriptures and
tablets. Today it is known that 96 percent of the universe is mysteriously dark.
The reader is encouraged to read the entire paper in order to follow argument
step-by step. the point we try to make in this paper is that cosmic duality is the
reason for disparities in the human civilization. Human civilization follows a
pattern of brain evolution. Brain evolution in turn follows cosmic wavelength
frequencies. In this paper, reader will encounter cosmological myths and stories
including biblical narratives relative to the origin of all things. I have also
described how light frequencies from the core of the cosmos affect not just our
neurology but also our genetic data base. It is my conviction, based on research,

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

72

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

that mental and genetic evolutions are triggered by information carried by
cosmic gamma rays and other electromagnetic cosmic light frequencies.
It is also my intention to point out that in this paper, I shall henceforth refer to
ancient Egypt in her original name of Kmt (Kemet/Kemit). Kemet means, the
black land. The word Egypt came from the Greek misuse of the phrase ‘Hut-KaPtah’ (House of Ka of Ptah). Ptah is one of the creator gods in Kemet cosmology.
The Greek word, Αἴγυ̟τος (Aigyptos) translates as Egypt. Any information
presented in this paper does not intend to cover all aspect of specific topics
discussed. It is rather a summation of vast compendium of cosmological theories
and other scientific information. Therefore, the reader is encouraged to do
further research in order to develop broader knowledge on any specific idea or
concept of interest.
Kemetic Cosmological Systems
Ancient kemetic priests did not believe in ex-nihil (out of nothing) theory of the
origin of the universe. Matter was conceived as eternal. They hold that in the
beginning there was chaos. This implies that matter existed in a formless state. A
superior intelligence, a god(s) introduced order into this preexisting primordial
chaos. This is how the visible world came to be according to ancient Kemet.
There are four versions of Kemetic creation systems. This include the Theban
(Thebes) system, the Heliopolitan System, the Metropolitan System and the
Memphis System (Diop, 1981). These customized versions came as a result of
specific local test rather than possessing complete autochthonous origin. As
stated above, ancient Kemetic thinkers proposed that matter has a primordial
existence--uncreated, indestructible and in a constate state of chaos. Many
scholars erroneously attribute to Greek philosophers the idea of the eternity of
matter. Democritus for instance proposed the existence of atom in the void of
space. He taught that matter was eternal. Aristotle affirmed that Matter, motion
and time are eternal (MacDonald et al, 2009) These theories are but reflections of
the Kemetian thinking. Since Kemetian civilization was before that of Greece, I
would argue, like many other researchers that Greek religious, philosophical and
metaphysical thinking was a prototype of the Kemetian system.
The chaotic, unpredictable flux state of matter was referred to as the primordial
waters of the beginnings. Priest initiates in Kemet understood matter as
containing inner dialectical principle with teleology towards higher evolution.
This inner dialectical principle was referred to in Kemet as the Nun. It is the
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

73

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

universal fire or the self-conscious. Later religious and philosophical writers
used words like “logos,” “the Nous” “monad” “spirit” “the demiurge”
“universal soul” “universal mind” “the word,” “Christ” “reason” etc., to paint
the picture of the same Kemetic Nun. Nun is the “instinctive movement towards
consciousness” (Pinch, 2002). It started from the blind chaotic primordial matter
to the attainment of consciousness. The word water is not to be reduced to a
literal connotation. It should rather serve as a descriptive category. Language is
limited when it comes to describing complex metaphysical concepts. In lieu of
this fact, symbolism, simulacra and ideogramic representations are often used for
epistemological purposes. In the Kemetic mind, water indicated the notion of
flexibility, i.e. the state of flux. Thus, using the symbol “primordial water” helps
us to abstract the concept of fluidity of primitive, formless and indestructible
subquantum energy in the cosmos.
According to Kemetian cosmology since matter existed in a state of chaos it was
viewed as pure potentiality. They understood quite well during their time that
matter was energy. Thus, they demonstrated advance thinking in physics and
quantum physics. Today scientists confirm that matter exist in three primordial
forms viz liquid, solid and gas. Some have added the fourth form of matter
which is the ether. Energy can be converted from one form to another. However,
according to modern scientific postulation, energy can either be created or
destroyed (Wrigglesworth, 1997). This modern awareness vindicates the Kemitic
position. The Kemetians did not conceive of a time of absolute nothingness
preceding creation as in the case of Hebrew system. Rather, they viewed ex-nihil
to mean prime matter being unorganized into third dimensional formation.
Creation was made possible as a result of superior intelligent organizing this
chaotic formless matter into cohesive order. Thus, the Creator/Creatrix did not
create but only introduced order into the preexisting initial subquantum field of
matter. The material for creation was preexistent.
Heliopolitan Version
The deity Atum was the main player in the Heliopolitan creation myth. Atum
was described as self-begotten. Initially he arose from the state of self-made
oneness into duality of material multiplicity (Silverman, 1997). Atum emerged
out of the primordial ocean of waters morphing into a mountain (dry land). The
idea of primordial ocean is also reflected in the Hebrew scripture (Gen.1:2).
Heliopolitan cosmology proposed that Atum masturbated and engendered male
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

74

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

and female principles (gods); Shu and Tefnut. These two initial principles
represented AIR and MOISTURE. Masturbation should not be reduced to sexual
act. In this context, masturbation indicates a positive (masculine) energy issuing
forth. Since sperm is the outcome of masturbation, it implies that Atum‘s
vibration caused primordial matter to take form. He impregnated the primordial
matters. This is just a fancy way of saying that he introduced order into the
chaotic void. Egyptians were right brain-based. Metaphysical concepts were
anthropomorphized
with
vivid
everyday
human
imageries.
Masturbation/sperm therefore indicates creation wave. This creation wave
depicts male energy. Male energy is projectile (penile). Female energy is
receptive the empty void, the womb, the water, the ocean or darkness. Just like
the Hebrew Genesis used the metaphor such as, ‫“( יְהִי אֱ ֹלהִים וַיּ ֹאמֶ ר‬and Elohim said
let there be…” ). The voice of God issuing forth indicate male principle mating
with the female principle or the void. The bible is occulted. This masculine
feminine union is revealed in the idea of the Sprit (positive energy) hovering
over the face of the deep (feminine energy or void of primordial waters).
According to Heliopolitan cosmology, Shu and Tefnut were endowed with
creative powers. So, they in turn engendered male and female principles
(deities)—Geb and Nut. These four basic anthropomorphized deities Shu, Tefnut,
Geb and Nut also represents the universal four elements known in all cultures
around the world. These include Air, Fire, Water and Earth. four element are
represented by different cultures thus, East, south, West and North; Gabriel,
Michael, Raphael and Uriel; Emanation, Creation, Formation and Action; Mental,
Spiritual, Emotional and Physical; Up, Down, Right and Left; Hot, Dry, Wet, and
Cold; Green, Yellow and Red; Eke, Orie, Afor and Nkwo etc. The last four
represents Igbo cosmology. These are the four-cardinal point without which the
mind cannot understand reality within this third density hologram.
Biblical writers incorporated this universal mathematics of the four elements in
painting a picture of the “Four Living Creatures” (Rev. 4:6-8; Ezekiel 1:5 and
Daniel 7:2-3). Daniel obviously spoke about the four-winds alluding the fourcardinal point. An expression that also alluded to the anthropomorphized deities
Shu, Tefnut, Geb and Nut.
In these biblical prophesies, the creatures were symbolically identified as Man,
Lion, Eagle and Ox. For anyone who is familiar with the ancient world and
imagery, these prophesies borrowed concepts from both Kemetic sphynx as well
as the Babylonian sphynx. Daniel was an elite in Babylon. He was versed in the
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

75

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

great Babylonian astrology. Babylonian sphynx presented a mythical creature
infused with FOUR identifiers, lion’s body, human head, ox hoof and eagle
wings. In Assyria as well as in most cultures of he so called middle east, this
creature was popularly known as lamassu (Rosen, 2009). One therefore wonders
if Daniel had a vision or only employ familiar imagery and mixing it with his
bone chilling and fear including technique to get attention and communicate the
message of the elite of the time.
In the New Testament we see the four elements counted as well. I use the term
occult in its original meaning—hidden (from the simple minded). It is not by
accident that there are four synoptic gospels— Mathew, Mark, Luke and John.
Those who chose the four gospels out of the numerous gospels were quite aware
of the information they are trying to communicate to those who understood
ancient mystery systems. In many catholic church buildings and arts, one sees
the synoptic evangelist Matthew, Mark, Luke and John were clearly occulted
with the Four cardinal symbols of the Universe viz Lion, Man, Ox and Eagle.
These represents Air, Fire, Water and Earth. All mystery systems of the ancient
world believe the world was created out of the four elements. These are also
depicted in four zodiac astrological signs representing Aquarius (man); fire, Leo
(lion); earth, Taurus (ox, bull); and water, Scorpio (eagle). The church condemns
zodiac astrology however, her structures is set on ancient astrology and
astrotheology. To conclude this session, I suggest that readers avoid reducing the
Egyptians four deities, Shu, Tefnut, Nut and Geb to mere superstitious myths or
primitive mind. They are rather the four-fundamental principle of creation of
matter. The materialist mind of modern man cannot even begin to understand
the depth of ancient metaphysical awareness.
Memphite Version
In Memphite version of Kemetic cosmology, the grand architect of the universe is
Ptah. The doctrine states that Ptah was a craftsman. Ptah is called ‘He who made
totality and caused the gods to evolve’ (Wasilewska, 2000). According to Gerald
Massey in his book Egyptian Wisdom and the Hebrew Creation, the story of
Ptah’s creation of the world was converted into creation of Heaven and Earth in
the Hebrew Genesis. Massey wrote that the singular Ptah of Kemet was later
identified with a group of Elohim in the Hebrew version of the same story.
Hebrew system painted a picture of Elohim separating the waters under the
firmament from the water above the firmament. (Genesis 1:7). In the original
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

76

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

Kemetic doctrine, Ptah separated Nut, above and below. After Ptah finished his
act of creation as a craftsman, he was content for what created. Hebrew system
reechoed similar satisfaction indicating that Elohim looked at his creation and it
was good.
Memphite doctrine has it that Ptah uttered a spoken word which summoned
Atum out of the primordial waters of Nun. As mentioned earlier, the primordial
water of nun ought to be understood as primal chaos of atom in the void. Ptah
causing Atum to emerge out of the primordial waters is equivalence to him
causing dry land to emerge out of the waters. One can clearly see that these
systems are all interrelated. To fully comprehend “Ptah the Risen Land”
emerging out of primordial dark waters one bear in mind the environment that
lead to the formulation of such cosmological thinking (Frankfort, 1978). The Nile
floods annually. So, the people were very familiar with water and flood. Thus,
giving rise to a cosmogony wherein the people could relate to.
Ptah created eight deities. These deities are known as the counsel of Enead. They
are Atum, Shu, Tefnut, Nut, Geb, Oriris, Isis, Set and Nephthys. The reader needs
to understand something here. Ptah was a craftsman. Therefore, his creation
existed as an immaterial idea in his mind. Thus, he then chose to objectify his
conception in the form of materialized creation following his craftmanship. Ptah
is also a porter who worked on a porter’s wheel. This is the same craftsmanship
we see in the book of Genesis. Elohim took the soil of the earth molded Adamah.
Jeremiah referenced the creator as a porter (Jeremiah 18: 1-7).
The book of Genesis also reflected this idea of counsel of deities in the statement
“Let us make mankind in our image, in our likeness” (Gen. 1:26) and, “Come,
Let’s go down and confuse the people with different language” (Gen, 11:7). The
world “let us” of course denotes plurality, a collection of deities in a council
reaching a crucial decision point. The ancient established their religious concepts
on polytheism. Even though most ancient systems theorized that there was a
supreme god, they nevertheless gave rooms for lesser deities to be venerated as
one saw fit. Monotheism is unnatural and unhealthy to this planet. Doctrinal as
well as dogmatic absolutism usually leads to aggressive suppression, intolerance,
murder and genocide.
Theban Version

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

77

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

Thebes was the religious and political capital of Kemet at the time of the
assumed Hebrew presence in the land. The chief creator deity in Thebes’
cosmological version was Amun/Amun or Amen. This is the same deity (Amen)
invoked at the end of prayer by so many religious folks. Although the church has
come up with a deceitful claim that Amen means “so let it be.” Research has
shown that this is mere ecclesiastical fancy linguistic acrobatics. Amen has no
other historical and etymological origin than the Kemetic god, Amun. Later he
acquired the solar suffix Re and was known as Amun-Re/Amen-Ra. By stretch of
critical thinking, one wonders if Jesus identified himself with the Kemeti deity by
identifying with Amen (Rev.3:14). John the evangelist obviously knew the
mystery taught in temples all over the ancient world.
The predominant cosmological content of the city of Thebes proposed that in the
beginning was a primordial water of NUN or NU. This primordial water is
universal. A powerful creative divine force from Amun acted on the primordial
water causing a mound (dry land) to emerge. A lotus also arose out of the murky
earth. Atum then sat on the bloomed but and burst into rays of light which
became the sun. Amun was also described as having a companion Amaunet
united and engendered the deities Nut and Tefnut. Shu and Tefnut in turn
engendered Geb and Nut. Amun-Ra then caused Shu to separate Geb and Nut in
order to create a space where material existence could be created (Starsheen,
2018). One could notice, as stated earlier, that these systems are not completely
independent of each other but variations of one doctrinal system. According to
Thebes system, after creation, Amun-Ra retrieved to the solar system which is set
sailing across the sky for millions of years watching over the created world.
It is clean that the ancient engaged in study of physics with anthropomorphic
flavors. The idea of matter, motion and time were represented in this
cosmological tales. Primordial state of inertia (formlessness) was acted upon by a
self-conscious Amen that brought about creation and individuation.
The Hermopolitan Version
Kemitic priests in Hermopolis identified eight deities associated with creation.
These were referred to as the ogdoad (group of eight). The number eight is also
the number of cosmic balance or eternity. So, it is not by chance that
Hermopolitan priest thought of creation as being initiated by the ogdoad. These
four deities were divided in four sets. As stated above, each group symbolizes
the four basic universal elements, earth, fire, air and water. Hermopolitan
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

78

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

cosmology links the ogdoad with the ocean of the beginning, the formless chaos.
These deities engendered a lotus flower. Lotus flower is a symbol of creation in
Kemet. According to this cosmology, out of the lotus flower, Ra emerged. To
better conceptualized this cosmological thinking in a clear perspective let’s take a
step further in explanation. Lotus is called water Lillie because it usually ducks
and thrives on a mucky water. Ra, emerging out of a Lotus implies the creation
of consciousness. Consciousness is the light that governs matter without which
matter remains in a state of inertia. One must avoid the temptation of
interpreting Ra as a material element with hydrogen and helium in a
combustible fusion. Ra instead, was a conscious deity. Kemetic people had
balanced cosmological and theological system. The world is not a property of
psychotic patriarchal deity as seen in Hebrew systems for instance. The ogdoad
are paired in groups of two symbolizing masculine and feminine principles.
These are, Nun and Naunet (Universal flood/primordial ocean and the
primordial matter), Hau and Hauhet (limitless and void), Kuk and Kauket
(darkness and obscurity), Amen and Amaunet (the hidden/unmanifest). This
unmanifested presence is usually represented as the wind. The Universal flood
represents the particles in the void, the atom. Then there is the space, then
darkness (dark matter and Dark energy) and then the invisible amen/amenet
(wind) which represent electromagnetic light spectrum. The ancients understood
physics way more than we give them credit for.
Mesopotamia Cosmological System
The world Mesopotamia is a combination of two Greek words; meso which
means between and potamus, river. The river being referenced are Euphrates
and Tigris. These are the same rivers that appeared in the book of Genesis. It is
evident from archaeological discoveries of cuneiform tablet that Mesopotamian
cosmology had strong influence on the Genesis system. Identical cosmological
tell s have been found in old Babylonia (1900-1600 BC), Middle Babylonia (16001200 BC), Late Assyria 800BC -600BC), Late Babylonia (600-500BC). These
provides the us with the original blueprint upon which the story of Noah, for
instance, was identically plagiarized. It was during the Babylonian exile (597-539
BC) that the Hebrews came face to face with advance Babylonian society and
started to incorporate their myths and legends in the making of their own sacred
texts (Dalley, 1989). The Babylonian Enuma Elish contains creation narrative.
Enuma Elish is also called the Seven Tablet of Creation. It opens with a primitive
watery chaos (Gmirkin, 2006). Enuma Elish described of a beginning:
“Before heaven has been made
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

79

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

And earth formed, only
Primordial apzu and Tiamat existed” (Enuma Elish)
“when the heavens did not exist,
And earth beneath had not come into being.” (Enuma Elish).
Similar Kemetic cosmology the Enuma Elish primitive chaos prior to creation.
There is no creation ex-nihil as proposed by the Hebrew system in Enuma Elish.
Mesopotamian system divided the primordial ocean into two, fresh water and
saltwater. One must probe deeper into this sophisticated cosmological concept to
understand what was being depicted. Freshwater signifies male principle while
saltwater stands for female principle. In other worlds, the concept of male and
female was introduced. Although these principles were deified as the god Apsu
and the goddess Tiamat. Apsu is the underworld god while Tiamat is the
primordial chaos. Tiamat is the personification of the sea (Marshall, 1991). One
needs to bypass the metaphorical symbolism to grasp the central message of this
cosmological system. By introducing these principles, a stage was set for unified
chaos to assume individuation or multiplicity. This concept was based on the law
of physics. The law of positive/negative or potential/kinetic energies dynamics.
The union of Apsu and Tiamat engender the first ordered motion. Prior to their
union everything unmanifested. When we discuss Mesopotamian cosmology, we
focus on Akkad, Summer and Babylon.
Sumerian civilization arose approximately 6000 year ago. Archaeological
excavation of the cuneiform tablet now provide insight into an ancient creation
system which later influenced the creation system we find in the book of Genesis.
These cuneiforms were excavated in ancient cities like Nineveh, Kish, Ashur,
Sultantepe, Ashurbanipal and Nippur (Owen, 1982). The Genesis account of the
creation of the world, the Edenic garden as well as the creation of man are
reenactment of the Sumerian cosmology. According to this cosmology, in the
beginning there was nothing, only boundless saltwater. Out of this primordial
seawater emerged the heavens and the earth. Heaven and earth were then
separate through the creative power of a god. Mesopotamia worldview lean
towards flat earth theory. It holds that beneath the earth is apsu/abzu which is
also understood to be primordial fresh water. The English word abyss is a
derivative of the word apsu/abzu.
Mesopotamian societies were interwoven with the activities of male and female
deities. In fact, these deities were the rulers of the people. Mesopotamian
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

80

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

cosmology did not just present the gods as ordering the word but also as
engaging in constant bickering. The dominant deity is Sumerian is AN, in
Akkadian he is ANU. The word ‘annual’ has etymological connection with the
name of the god Anu. Anu is a heavenly deity. He is ‘god the father’ the creator.
Below Anu is Enlil. Researchers have linked Enlil with Jove, Iao, Yahwah or the
Jehovah deity (De Vere, 2004). Just like the Hebrew Yahweh, Enlil was described
as exhibiting similar bipolar temperament of mood swing. Enlil was later
elevated to the level of supreme god and called “father” as well as ‘lord of the
earth.’ Enki is another Mesopotamian god who mastermind creation in the
Garden of Eridu (Garden of Eden). He oversaw the rivers, Tigris and Euphrates.
In the Mesopotamian region of Akkad, Enki was known as Ea. In Greece
Enki/Ea was known as Poseidon or the god Neptune.
The similarity between Sumero-Akkadian-Babylonian and the Genesis creation
myths betrays Hebraic adaptation. For instance, in Babylon god finished his
work of creation in 6 days. Genesis described creation in 6 days. Enuma Elish put
the creation of man day number six. Genesis reinstate creation of man on the
sixth day as well. The seventh part of Enuma Elish which is the last was
dedicated to praise of the creator god. Genesis dedicate the seventh day to
venerate the creator. Tablet v of Enuma Elish reported the creation of the sun,
the moon and the stars. Genesis reports the creation of same celestial bodies on
the fourth day.
By 4000 B.C. the Sumerians had mapped out the positions of the solar system
with such precise accuracy. The Babylonians were Masters of Mathematical
astronomy (Finkle,2014). Modern astronomy aided with sophisticated telescope
and space probes have been able to describe the space between the orbit of Mars
and Jupitar as the Asteroid Belt. But ancient Sumerians accurately describe this
belt in detail. They described it as a leftover debris from the planet Tiamat.
Tiamat was destroyed in what appeared to be the battle of the gods. The planet
was hit by another bigger planet known as Nibiru which crosses our solar system
every 3600 years. (Sitchin,1990). It was the planet Nibiru that destroyed Tiamat
leaving the debris known today as the asteroid belt. Modern astronomers now
confirm that there was a great cataclysm thousands of years ago which shattered
a planetary body between Mars and Jupitar.
The Sumerians understood that the planet Nibiru is the home of the Annunaki
gods. Nibiru was a planet that orbited the triad star system of Sirius which is
popularly known within astronomical cycle as Sirius C. The triad star system of
Sirius has been identified as Sirius A, Sirius B and Sirius C. Sirius A is
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

81

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

anthropomorphized as the god Sothis, Sirius B is the god Satais and Sirius C is
the god Anu. Anu is the leader of the Annunakis. These beings were reflected in
the bible as “Anakim,” or the “Nephilim.” (Genesis 6:4; Numbers 13:33).
The Sumerians explained that these gods gave them knowledge of astrology,
civilization, religion etc. It was the Annunaki who genetically engineered
mankind with their advanced technology by mixing their genetics utilizing
invitro fertilization by extracting their own “blood” which they mixed with
dirt/dust. Genesis also speaks of the gods making man in his image as well as
forming man out the dust of the earth and putting him in servitude to “tend the
garden and keep it” yet cursing the ground so his labor so he toils more (Gen.
3:17). This is a typical behavior of the Annunaki slave overloads as depicted in
ancient texts.
The purpose of creating lulu or human was to serve the gods. Service in this
context implies slavish subjugation which consist of working the ground and
mining gold for the Annunaki gods. The book of Genesis covertly described this
genetic engineering by indicating that the gods extracted rib (genetic
grafting/DNA extraction) from Adam. Rib is a symbolic statement here. Many
researchers have interpreted this as Eve being cloned from Adam. Today
mankind now poses this advanced technology of the gods and can create clones
and hybrid creatures. This is the technology called genetic engineering.

Early Greek Thinkers on Primordial Chaos
Ionian philosophers were the first pre-Socratic thinkers to explain the origin of
the material universe in contract to popular religious mythos. Ionia is the current
day western coast of Anatolia in what is called Turkey. Thales (620 -546 B.C.), an
Iranian postulated that everything originated from the primordial ocean of
waters. Anaximander (620 B.C.) another Iranian thinker spoke of chaos in the
boundless space which he identified with ‘Apeiron.’ The ancients were
consistent in their affirmation about what existed prior to third density reality.
They were consistent in stating that the prime matter was flux, formless,
uncreated and in a pure state of potentiality. Pythagoras (530 B.C) proposed that
all things are numbers which exist in the boundless space. Was Pythagoras
alluding to atoms or to the geometrical patterns that vibrates themselves into
reality? No doubt, Pythagoras like other thinkers was quite aware of the
existence of primordial ocean of water (chaos). The reason he did not focus on
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

82

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

this was because he was mainly preoccupied with formulating ascetic practices
to liberate the soul from entrapment of matter. That is, Pythagoras was only
interested in redemption.
The brilliant material monist, Heraclitus (530 B.C.-470 B.C.) spoke about the
union of opposites. This is the same theory proposed by Kemetic priests. The
union of masculine and feminine principles is necessary to bring about creation.
Heraclitus talked about universal fire or the universal logo. This is the intelligent
that organizes the opposites into a union. Fire is a principle of animation. The
Heraclitan fire should not be reduced to the combustible gaseous elements as we
know. Heraclitus was referring to immutable universal reason. The bible
identified this universal fire as the “voice of God.” It was the vibratory wave of
the voice of God which introduced order into the initial formlessness.
Anaxagoras (500 B.C. – 430 B.C.) replicated the nous theory of the Kemetic priest.
He stated that Nous was the self-conscious and self-organizing principle in the
cosmos. The atomist, Democritus (420 B.C.-316 B.C.) stated that in the beginning
there was infinite number of ‘World stuff’ in the dark void of space. The phrase
‘world stuff’ undoubtedly refers to atoms. He believes the atoms were uncreated.
As I have demonstrated in this paper, Democritus also validated the other
preexisting theories regarding chaos existing in dark space (ocean of waters).
The reason the ancient referred to the atom as chaos is due to its vibratory
nature. Atom is in constant motion. The protons form the nucleus of an atom
while electrons orbit the same nucleus in a bubble of cloud known as electron
cloud. Sometimes the ancient referred to proton and electron as male and female.
sometimes they used male deity and female deity. The reason was that they
understood that electron carry negative charge (feminine) while proton carry
positive charge (masculine). The union of which creation motion. It is also the
union of this opposite that creates everything especially in the realm of
materiality. So, when the Kemetic priests referred to Nun and Naunet, we must
look deeper because they are talking about quantum physics utilizing religious
concepts.
By the time of the Eleatic thinkers, 6th Century B.C., preoccupation had shifted to
change and permanence in the universe instead of on the origin of matter. Elea is
modern day Italy. The Eleatic philosopher Parmenides (540 B.C.) has a work tittle
Peri Physeos (On Nature). Like the Kemetian priests he identified logos as the
intelligent organizing principle in nature. One should bear in mind that nature

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

83

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

here stands for the totality of all that is including God. We see in Parmenides
that Kemetic Nous which is self-aware became Logos, or the universal mind.
Canaanite System
The ancient land of Canaan presented a cosmological system that greatly
influenced the Hebrew system. The land of Canaan was in a strategic
geographical location absorbing cultures and philosophies coming from Egypt
and Mesopotamia. The impoverished, homeless and wandering Hebrews
purportedly ordered by a sadistic deity to commit genocide in the land of
Canaan and forcefully take over their land. The Hebrews no doubt adopted some
religious ideas from the Canaanites. After much plagiarism of major theological
and cosmological view, we see Hebrew prophets unleashing unmitigated
criticism of the Canaanite religio-cosmological system.
Like many ancient societies, Canaanite cosmology is theocentric. Four deities
were the major heavyweight players. They are El, Baal, Anat and Yam. El was
the creating force in the universe. El was described as having no beginnings. Baal
on his own part was the preserver of the created world. Baal was synonymous
with actions. He was described as young and animated. One attribute is that he
is a storm god. Being stormy does not only paint the picture of action, it points
to the law of motion which defies the primordial inertia.
Hebrew Plagiarized Version
In presenting a concise Hebrew Cosmology our focus is limited to creation
imageries in the book of Genesis. Hebrew cosmogony presents a geocentric
cosmology. Earth was primary focus of the creator deities. Unlike the Sumerian
system that accurately described interstellar space and specific names of other
planets in and out of our solar system, Hebrew system was limited. Our primary
focus in this paper is the similarity of cosmological representation before creation
was made manifest. Hebrew cosmology as well painted a picture of the watery
world of the primordial beginnings. Like other ancient cosmologies, there was
darkness, the deep (space) chaos, formlessness and void. In addition, we were
told the spirit (feminine noun) hovered above the waters of chaos. Darkness,
deep, void, space and the spirt all represents femininity. Then emerged the
masculine principle, the penetrating voice that spoke creative order into the
primordial formlessness. A closer look shows that masculine and feminine

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

84

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

principle was there as well in Hebrew system. One could say the creator is
androgynous, male and female principles but either a male of a female.
The earth was conceived to be flat and permanent and permanently stationed on
pillars. One also gets the sense of the earth floating on the waters. Above the
firmaments are the watery sea described as the “waters above the firmament.”
Then the waters below the firmament otherwise known as “the deep.” Above the
earth is the dome of the firmament where the constellations are positioned.
Creation account opens thus:
“In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
Now the Earth was unformed and void,
And darkness was upon the face of the deep” (Gen. 1: 1-2)
The synchronicity of the biblical version especially with the Kemetians, the
Mesopotamian and other preexisting creation legends of ancient world is clear.
According to one of the many versions of Egyptian cosmology described above,
we encounter the word Atum. The Egyptian Atum (first creator god who sad on
muddy mound) became the Sumerian Adamu (first man created by mixing mud
with the blood of a god). In Hebrew he was converted again to Adamah or Adam
(first man created out of mud). The religio-cultural symbiosis of ancient world
stands out clearly. From Atum to Adamu to Adam, the morphology was
carefully adapted to suit cultural flavors. Still we the journey continues into the
era. Atum, Adamu and Adam emerged in modern quantum physics describing
the (first) building block of all reality, ATOM. In whichever way you look at it,
these terminologies point certain primal origin. The Indian sacred Sanskrit has
the word ADIM which stands for the beginning. I suggest reader do their own
homework to decode the historical evolution of these concepts.
For the
Egyptians, Atum (first cause) engendered two collaborative principles (deities),
Shu (Air)and Tefnut(moist). Even though Egyptians introduced zoomorphic and
anthropomorphic construct into their cosmology, nevertheless, they were very
advance in what you might call today as physics. To understand how corrupt the
bible is, Adam had two sons. One wonders who they married. This is a left-brain
based thinking. This is where the bible took the rout of left-hand negative route.
Two positives (males) cannot engender another being. And this is where Kemetic
system proves superior of Hebrew system. Atum created Shu and Tefnut. This
makes more sense than Hebrew/Adam’s Can and Abel especially bearing in
mind that these names were not people by union of opposites.

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

85

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

Kemetic priests understood that the principle of positive and negative are
prerequisite in the Universe. Kemet also presented gods male and female
companion. Two negatives or two positives would be abomination in the
Kemetic mind. Thus, they presented a balanced cosmos. The sickness of
unbalanced cosmos continues to be seen in male only priesthood in many
religions. The mother, the universal motherhood is destroyed. This is a
destructive left-brain conception of reality which the West is known for.
In Kemet, Shu and Tefnut engendered Nut (heaven/masculine) and Geb
(earth/feminine). Kemetic deities when it was introduced to the Greek became
the famed demiurge. However, Greek overly represented unbalanced principles
in the cosmos. Their deities were known to be egotistical homosexual patriarchal.
Following the concept of Nut and Geb, Hebrew biblical cosmology formulated
that Elohim (the gods) created the heaven and the earth.
In the Sumerian creation account, we encounter the word ERIDU. The Anunnaki
gods come down from the heavens and involved in the creation drama which
finalized in making of ADAMU/ADAMA race. Anunnaki within the Sumerian
linguistic system means “those who from heaven came to earth.” The Sumerian
creation myth described a beautiful garden, named ERIDU. The Sumerian
ERIDU where the Anunnaki walked physically later became the Hebrew Garden
of Eden (ERIDU) where the Elohim (the gods not God) walked physically as
well. Translation of the plural noun Elohim (‫ )אלוהים‬into the singular noun, God
in English language is a premeditated deception. The word Elohim has gone
through ecclesiastical fancy brush by identifying the plural deities with the
concept of God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit. Every unbiased
Hebrew scholar understood this perverted trick. This trick is meant to cover the
fact that Elohim and the Sumerian Anunnaki overloads are one and the same
according to so many independent researchers.
The German word—Erde, the Dutch word—Aarde, Old English word—eorthe,
Aramaic word—Aratha/Ereds, Gothic word—Airtha, the Kurdish word—
Erd/Ertz, the Hebrew--Eretz as well as the English word—Earth derived from
the Sumerian world Eridu (Sitchen, 2000). Although there is slight linguistic
distortion due to thousands of years of mutation, the consistency is crystal clear.
Enuma Elish (Babylonian creation story) chronicled extensively the activities of
the Anunnaki lords.

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

86

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

The Babylonians, as part of Mesopotamian civilization, were advanced in
Sexagesimal mathematics, physics of the solar system as well as in astrotheology. Enuma Elish described the solar system thousands of years before the
invention of telescope. Modern science is still trying to catch up with what the
ancient knew. It is out of ignorant of how the ancient science of the cosmos that
modern people call them blind and primitive. For instance, between 10,000 B.C.E.
to 6000 B.C.E., the Kemetians had already developed advanced solar calendar
(Ben-Jochannan, 2000). With their advance knowledge of astronomy, the
Kemetians understood the Orion Star Constellation in detail (Bouval, 2000).
Evidently the three great pyramids of Giza were oriented perfectly toward the
three stars of the Orion belt which is located millions of light years from the
earth.
Gnostic Cosmology
Gnosticism is based on the concept that one can attain knowledge of higher
realities (realm) through divine intuitive, inner knowledge also known as Gnosis.
Many scholars would argue that Christianity is a mishmash of orphism as well
hermeticism. Gnosticism was part of early Christian theological sect. Some
gnostic teachers were mentioned in the new testament, Nicolas whose followers
were called Nicolaitans (Rev. 2:5) and Simon (Acts 8:9). Information presented
about these figures in the new testament are scanty and propaganda based.
Gnosticism first emerged in Syria and populated Mediterranean region. But
during the time of the Roman emperor, Hadrian (A.D, 110 A.D. –38 A.D.), Syrian
Gnosticism moved to Kemet. Figures like Basilides, Carpocrates and Valentines
standing tall in Alexandria (Doresse, 1986). Gnostic cosmology is diverse
depending on doctrinal variations of specific school. Just like there are variations
Christian theological school, Lutheran, Calvinism, Catholicism etc. However, the
central message of Gnosticism in relations to material creation remains similar.
There is an unknowable prime originator of all things. This unknowable
transcendental being made lesser spirits. He is not associated with the material
creation. Then the lesser spirits out of rebellion made the material world.
Gnosticism held that the material universe is debased.
According to the Gnostics the material world was created by the fallen evil
demiurge. This demiurge goes by different names, Ialdaboath, Archon, Iao,
(Yahweh), Sabaoth, Adonaois, Astaphaios, Eloaios, Horaios Jehovah, etc. These
would be what Christian call Satan. Evidently the demiurge was associated with
Elohim of the bible. Gnostics believes the God of Genesis to be evil demiurge. He
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

87

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

is of the lower heaven. They hold that since the God of Genesis is associated
with material creation, he cannot be from the higher realm. The manifestation of
matter was contrary to the will of the transcendental prime creator. The catholic
church persecuted and murdered the original Gnostics out of existence in so
many places.
Gnosticism lean towards a famine universe. Judaism, Christianity and Islam on
the other hand lean towards a psychotic masculine godhead. Gnosticism taught
the preeminence of femininity in the order of existence. Scientist now posit that
ninety six percent of the cosmos is dark energy and dark matter associated with
the feminine. Only four percent of reality that is masculine. This begs the
question, is the prime architect of all things a father or a divine motherhood? We
know that the gnostic libraries were set on fire. Gnostic teachers were killed, and
some were driven into exile by ecclesiastical papacy and his dictatorial
bishoprics. Many church fathers outrightly published lies and fabrications
against the Gnosticism. This lies and fabrications were promoted by the church
and has come to define Gnosticism. Many researchers still believe that
Gnosticism is closer to the truth compared to the current Christian doctrinal
fabrications coming out of Constantine’s Nicaean counsel of 325A.D.
Vedic Indian Cosmology
Indian Rig Vada cosmology is vast. So, justice would not be done in explaining
the complete package of this worldview in its entirety in this paper. The reader is
advised to carry out further research for additional information. Rig Veda holds
that in the beginning was nothingness. Nothingness does not refer to ex-nihil.
Rather, it refers to absence of order. This postulation shares commonality with
the Kemetian cosmology. Rig Veda suggests the existence of a primordial ocean
as well as primordial chaos. It was unclear how this chaos was introduced.
However, Veda cosmology is clear about who introduced order into the
formlessness. It was the god Indra who brought order into the state of formless
void and chaos. Indra achieved this through his boundless creative power. One
of the divine attributes of Indra is he who has a thousand testicles. The
introduction of genitalia here should not be construed literally. One is aware that
anthropomorphism could present serious roadblock to textual decipherment.
Indra possessing a thousand testicles in this context indicates unmatchable
creative potency. Biologically speaking, the testicles are sex organ responsible for
producing sperm. Sperm cells are responsible for fertilizing the egg thereby
engineering new creation.
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

88

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

Veda cosmological doctrine, like so many other cosmologies, firmly established
male and female principles in the order of existence. Masculine energy (Indra’s
testicle) unites with feminine energy (primordial dark matter/chaos) in order to
engender creation. Indra’s had to conquer the primordial forces of chaos before
creation sprang out. Indra is also a combat god who must overcome many
battles.
Evidently Indra true to his nature separate ‘sat’ from “asat.” Sat is existence or
creation. Asat is the chaos or nonexistence (Prasad, 1995). That is, he separated
existence from nonexistence. Nothingness has always existed. One must bear in
mind that the notion of nothingness applies to chaos, not ex-nihil. There is
already preexisting materials for creation. In the Hebrew narrative, God
separated the waters above from the waters beloved. Similar creative process
that is found in Rig Veda. It was Indra separated heaven and earth in Vedic
cosmology (Ev Cochrane, 2010). Sat and Asat were separated.
Zinda Vesta Cosmological System
Zinda Vesta is the sacred scripture of the religion of Zoroastrians. The religion
was founded by Zarathustra. Scholars date the time of this prophet between 1500
B.C. to 1200 B.C. (Knight et al, 1996). Zinda Vesta was priced as authoritative in
providing adherence with solid cosmological interpretation of reality. The deity
Ahura Mazda is the principal actor within this cosmology. Ahura Mazda stands
for ‘Lord Wisdom’ (Kia, 2016). Avesta describes creation like an egg. The upper
half is the sky. The lower half is the earth with the waters. The cosmogonic
account described in Zinda Vesta identified the number seven (stages) with
creation just as we see in Hebrew scripture. The first in the creation stage was
the heavens/sky. Next step, the earth conceived as flat. Next, was the
water/ocean. Forth in line a single tree. Fifth, a single bull and sixth a man. Thus,
after crating the earth, plants, animals, the creation of humans followed. Hebrew
system presented similar creation sequence viz vegetations (Gen. 1:11), animals
(Gen. 1:24), and Man/Woman (Gen. 1:26). Then came the seventh creation which
is fire (sun). Zinda Vesta described two forms of fire viz the regular fire we know
and the inner fire. The inner fire is the cosmic soul. Without cosmic soul matter
will forever reman in a state of inertia. The cosmology continued thus: The first
tree, the animal/bull and the first man were in the state of inertia. The bull
(white) dwelled on a riverbank. The usage of the color “white” in this description
may symbolize original innocence or uncorrupted state. The bull was also
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

89

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

described as humongous. On the other side of the riverbank stood the man who
was referred to as ‘mortal life.’ From this point on, Zinda Vesta introduced
movement/activities into the prevailing prime inertia. The bull and the man
were sacrificed by the gods. And out of their sacrificial demise other humans and
animals were created. To decipher this cosmology, one needs to be familiar with
ancient symbolism. The bull dwelt on the water. Water significance feminine
energy. The man and the bull both signify masculine energy. Male and female
principle entered the creative process.
Popul Vuh Cosmological System
The Popol Vuh is considered the sacred ‘bible’ of the Mesoamericans. This
scripture describes the creation of the world from a primordial matter. It depicts
a time of the beginning of all things. Noting existed but the void, darkness and
chaos. Like other cosmologies, Popol Vuh spoke about the primordial ocean of
waters. This scripture identified specific names of gods who became the great
architect of the universe. Among these gods was the Sovereign Plumed Serpent
known and Quetzalcoatl (Taube, 1993). Other gods have tittle such as Maker,
Begetter, Modeler, Heart of the lake, Bearer and Heart of the sea. These gods held
a counsel with other sky deities to in reference to their plan for creation. This
idea of the gods holding a council was reflected in the holy bible as well: “Come
let us make…’ indicating plurality of entities reaching a consensus. We see this
unanimous agreement in Popol Vuh. In their council, the gods concluded to free
the cosmic womb of its entrapped potentials. Similarity in Zinda Vesta
cosmology, Indra freed cosmic water of creation from the monstrous demon
Vritra. Popol Vuh described earth as coming out of the primordial water by
means of command (voice). The poetic serenity of the primordial world as
described the people of Mesoamerica is enchanting. In the primordial beginning,
all was still, only infinite waters. Then came the vibration which led to third
density creation. Here is the description:
“Now it still ripples, now it still murmurs, ripples,
it still sighs, still hums and it is empty under the sky.”
The above draft paints a picture of when time did not exist. There was no human
being or animal, no tree, no ground, nothing except the sea. There was utter state
of inertness. No motion or activities. We interpret the enchanting description of
ripples and murmurs and signs to be what scientist could describe as the initial
Big Bang. Biblical terminology refers to the same as the voice of God issuing
forth a command. This has something to do with sound vibration through light
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

90

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

frequencies. When Photons of like which is pure spirit slows down it condenses
into matter. In order world, matter is a slowed down (condensed) vibration of
spirit.
Igbo Cosmological System
The Igbos of South Eastern Nigeria has a cosmological system that agrees with
the other systems enumerated above. The Igbos knew about the primordial
ocean. They express their cosmology in their mythos. It appears that the idea of
universal ocean was a frequency which was downloaded by the human
consciousness all over the world irrespective of geographical location. The Igbos
refer to a beginning when everywhere was covered with water (primordial
ocean). They express that in the beginning “ala di deke-deke.” Roughly
translates “in the beginning everywhere (the land) was waterlogged. The mythos
creates a sense of universal instability (chaos). The Igbos utilized zoomorphism
in their creation mythology by explaining the reason chameleon moves very
slowly. It is because when dry land started to emerge out of the primordial
cosmic ocean everywhere still waterlogged and muddy. Therefore, the
chameleon learned to move about with extreme precaution. In another version of
the Igbo zoomorphic cosmology, okpoko (pied hornbill) had no place to bury its
parents due to there was no dry land, only primordial ocean of waters. So, it had
to bury them on either side of his head which explained why the bird has
enlarged head and beak. In some other versions of Igbo cosmology, an anthill
emerged out of the primordial waters. The creator then established creation on
the anthill. This is like the Kemetic Ptah causing a hill to emerge out of the waters
and creating the world. In another version of Kemetic mythos, Ptah was the hill.
Igbo cosmology learn towards cosmic balance. There are positive and negative
principle which endangered creation. These principles were deified as ‘Igwe’ (the
sky) and ‘Ala’ (earth goddess). The idea of union of opposite is engrained in Igbo
consciousness. It also points to a sense of cosmic duality.
There appear to be a common trend in most of the systems discussed above. The
all identified the beginning of creation with the water of chaos, darkness and
formlessness.
Science postulate that 96 percent of the cosmos is dark
energy/dark matter. So, there is agreement in belief at least between religion
and science as chaos, atom and darkness. What differs is agreement in attitude.
Religion propose an intelligent creator to be the organizing fore of chaos into
creation. Scientist of materialist predilection propose that this force behind
existence is a purely irrational, blind and mechanical lacking in conscious
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

91

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

ontology. The Bible states that out of this boundless and incomprehensible
darkness God uttered a command “let there be light” and so we were told “and
there was light.” Science holds that out of Big Bang the universe was born.
Hermeticism, Manicheanism and Cosmic Duality
The 36,000-year-old religious document known as the Emerald Tablet of Thoth is
the oldest known religious teaching on this planet. The god Thoth is also known
as Tahuti. The Greek called him Hemes or Hermes Trismegistus. In Rome he was
the god Mercury (Judah-El, 2015). It is from Hermes we get Hermetics which
relates to the mystical writings of Hermes. When the Greeks came to Kemet,
they identified Tehuti’s cultural center as Hermopolis (the city Hermes). In
general usage hermeticism means esoteric traditions attributed to the teachings
of Hermes Trismegistus. We encounter in Christian theology the concept of
Hermeneutics. This concept derived from the occult teaching of the god
Thoth/Tehuti/Hermes. One can see that the church plays double agents. On the
one hand condemning ancient mysteries as satanic and on the other hand
covertly practicing and copying from the same esoteric mysteries while
pretending original doctrines.
Thoth/Tehuti or Hermes taught the Seven Hermetic Principles. The fourth of
these seven principles is the law of polarity, i.e duality. This implies that all
things have two sides. Even the prime creator by deciding to create matter he
shows his other side. He engendered duality and multiplicity. Duality is
intended by the creator to govern creation. ‘Good and evil’ are necessary and
they do exist side by side. One must also bear in mind that somethings the
human mind classify as evil are just some necessary process of balance when
considered on a grand cosmic scale. Evil vs good are but thesis and anti-thesis
which leads to synthesis, a doctrine that Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770 –
1831) expounded quiet well in his famous dialectical philosophy (Steward, 2000).
Hegel underwood duality as necessary for all evolutions of consciousness.
Manichaeism is a religious philosophy of dualism. This religious movement
originated in ancient Iran. It was founded by Mani (216 A.D. – 274 A.D.). All
famous religious ‘mystery’ systems on earth came from the esoteric teaching of
Hermes, Mani was an initiate in ancient version of Hermetic mysteries. His
dualistic teachings came from the teaching of Hermes. The core doctrine of
Manichaeism centers on cosmic duality. Mani like Buddha has logical and
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

92

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

mystical preoccupation with good and evil in the universe. Mani thought that
these two eternally co-existing forces or principles express themselves in the
form of fight between light and darkness (Coyle, 2009). St. Augustine of Hippo,
a former initiate of Manichaeism, lunched an ecclesiastical anti-polemics against
Mani’s teaching. St. Augustine’s famous work is titled On the City of God. The
title of this work vindicates Manichaean dualism. St. Augustine created a sharp
contrast between the City of God (Catholic Church) and the City of Man, the
State. He claimed that the City of God leads to the eternal father. Conversely, the
City of Man leads to perdition. Is there any better way to talk about good vs evil
polarity as preached by Mani than this? Basically, St. Augustine was talking
about the duality between good and evil using, eloquently, his fancy apologetic
brush. St. Augustine’s writings betrayed his secrete admiration for Manichean
dualism as reflected in his preoccupation with the nature of evil and the nature
of good.
Any logical thinker understands that the idea of affirmation also contains the
idea of negation. Just as the idea of life carries the idea of its dual negation,
death. To talk about good implies knowledge of the non-good or evil. To talk
about a tall man implies foreknowledge of a short man. For St. Augustine to talk
about good indicates that there is evil even though he was trying to justify his
religion by absorbing God of all responsibilities to the existence of evil. This
leads many thinkers to conclude that Christian theology is apologetically
infantile. St. Augustin was reestablishing what Mani tried to do. That is,
understand evil vs good polarity. Mani’s philosophical construction was
misrepresented by the ecclesiastical system. In philosophy the problem of evil is
a real problem which is yet to be solved. Mani, as an adept of preexisting ancient
‘mystery system’ understood the existence of duality as a phenomenon within
the cosmic realm. This duality was spoken about by other ancient teachers as
“the harmony of opposites.” Grown-up thinkers understood God to be
androgynous. Therefore, in him is the principle of polarity. Even though this
polarity is unified in perfect harmony. Nevertheless, it is there. The very
component of atom, the building block of reality contains duality—electron and
proton—engaged in an endless vibrational struggle.
Mani proposed that there is ongoing struggle between two core universal
principles-- birth and death. I suggest that one look at these universal principles
with adequate metaphysical insight. These two principles act as comic justice
that balances all thing within the three-dimensional reality. Matter is in constant
motion. Motion implies change. For there to be movement or activity in the
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

93

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

primordial cosmic inertia, there must be struggle of polarity. For there to be
movement within an atom there must be dualistic polarity. There is matter and
anti-matter, gravity and anti-gravity as well as energy and anti-energy. The
universal struggle of opposites is a reality impressed open the logical mind
through sense perception. The notion of death as cessation of vital function of the
brain of a biological human organism is necessary in this real. Life and death are
the oscillation of cosmic duality in harmonious unity. It is a form of Manichean
duality or endless battle of two opposite of the same unity with creativity
manifestation well as negative entropy. Mani was right, there is parallel struggle
of opposites and it is cosmically eternal.
Duality in Kemetic Cosmology
The religious notion of God and the Devil is also the notion of order and chaos in
the cosmos. For the Kemetians, order is represented by the law of Maat. Maat is
the organizing principle, the law of justice, harmony, reciprocity and balance.
Maat is a feminine principle. She was anthropomorphized as a goddess. By
following the law of Maat, balance is maintained. Maat also represents eternal
truth. The Kemetians believed in the interconnectedness of reality. Any
disharmony in any part of the cosmic system affect the entire system. Opposed to
Maat is an evil chaotic principle known as Isfet (falsehood). Isfet fights against
goodness, righteousness, truth, justice and harmony. Isfet is constantly at work
trying to overthrow Maat. Kemetians often represent Isfet as a monstrous evil
force. They depict him as the destructive serpent known as Apophis. This
indicate that there is a Manichaean-like dualistic battle between good and evil
the universe. However, Kemetians believe that Apophis, in the final battle,
would be defeated and his body dismemberment. These dualistic principles were
also described in the ‘contending of Horus and Seth’ (Wakeman,1973). Horus
was born of immaculate conception, had twelve disciples, taught in the temple at
the age of twelve and performed miracles. Seth is the evil one who opposes
Horus. In certain version this takes on the form of astro-mythology. Horus is the
risen ‘Sun of God’ and he won the battle over Seth (evil) who also represents
darkness. Kemetic cosmology indicates that there is endless battle between
Horus (principle of good) and Seth (principle of evil). Night and day is also
anthropomorphized as the dual struggle between Horus and Seth. In another
version of this cosmology, Horus is represented as Ra (the sun) while Seth is
depicted as the Apophis, dark and evil. It was stated that at sundown Horus
battle Seth all night and comes out victorious at sunrise.

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

94

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

Duality in Mesopotamia Cosmology
Mesopotamia has a cosmological thinking describing ongoing battle between
light and darkness. The hero of this battle is Ninurta who symbolizes order.
Ninurta has an opposer, the demonic viperous monster Anzu. Anzu dwells in
the underworld, the Apsu. The word abyss has its root in Apsu (Sitchin, 1977).
As the demon of the underworld he constantly works to offset cosmic balance to
usher in the reign of chaos and destruction. The power tussle between Ninurta
and Anzu is on a cosmic scale and endless. The winner would decide the fate of
the entire world. Humanity would either be ruled by good or by evil. There are
variations to this story. However, they all focus on the battle between light and
darkness. Ninurta was also said to have fought Labbu another massive monster
whose every essence chaos. In another version of the story, Niturta defeated
Asakku whose aim was to nullify all things that stood for good. Asakku
represents sickness and everything death. With the fall of Babylon came the rise
of Assyria. In Assyria, Ninurta became the god Ashur. Even though there was a
name change based on adaptation, the central idea or concept remained the
same. That is, there is a battle going on between light and darkness and its
endless.
Duality in Canaanite Cosmology
In Canaan, Baal was portrayed as engaging in battle with Yam. Yam was
described as the primordial water or ocean of chaos. While El and Baal were
creating, maintaining and preserving order in the world, Yam did the opposite.
Yam was described as a chaos monster of destruction introducing disharmony in
the universe (Beal, 2002). Hinduism also presents a picture of the god Yama who
is associated with darkness, death and destruction. No doubt both Yam and
Yama have one ancient conceptual derivation. Another chaotic monster in the
Canaanite pantheon catalogue was the god Mot. Mot was equivalent to death
and destruction. Mot represented darkness, evil, drought and famine. Like the
god Seth in Kemet, Mot was the demon of the barren desert. Baal as the defender
of El’s created order has the duty of engaging Mot to preserver creation. The arch
energy was Yam and Mot, both fierce unruly monstrous forces. Mot was the god
of the underworld since associated with death and darkness. Baal was said to
have journeyed to the door of hell to battle with Mot. In the myth, we were told
that Baal was defeated. However, the goddess Anat lunched into rescue mission
and saved Baal from the jaw of darkness. The battle of the god was also
interpreted to include changes in seasons. Rain and abundance on the one hand
and dryness and barrenness on the other. The reader must have noticed at this
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

95

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

point the introduction of male and female principle as the defender of created
order. That is, Baal and Anat. Although presented in theomorphic interpretation
the myth was alluding to cosmic duality.
Duality in Vedan Cosmology
In the Rig Veda system, there is a cosmic law called ‘rita.” Rita is a positive
balance in the universe. Everything should follow the law of rita. Rita is
equivalent to Kemetic law of maat. Rita is the way of the cosmos, the blueprint
for creation. Rita is superior to the gods. Just like in Kemet the gods follow the
law of Maat. Disobedient to this law is what introduces evil and chaos in the
universe. The law of rita teleologically leads all things in existence to their
purposeful end. The human moral law is derived from the law of rita. There is a
contra force whose goal is to negate rita. This force is called vritra. Vritra is an
ach-demon. By its very nature the destroyer. In the Christian theology he would
equate with Satan. He is often depicted as a monstrous serpent. Vritra is
deceptive, cunning and vile. The god Indra and his cohorts were said to be given
the responsible of defending rita (the truth). Just as in Christian theology Michael
is said to be the defender of the kingdom of light from the ever-waring forces of
darkness. Indra fighting on behalf of rita to defeat the arch-demon vritra and his
forces.
Duality in Avestan Cosmology
Zorastarianism has the concept of Asha and Druj. Asha is truth, druj is falsehood.
Avesta sees this two peinciples as engaged in a battle. The principle of good is
represented by the god Ahura Mazda, the principle of evil is represented by
Angra Mainyu. Ahura Mazda is the principle of light, harmony, truth, order and
balance. On the other hand, Angra Mainyu is the force of falsehood representing
disharmony as well as the law of entropy. Avesta has it that in the order of
things, there is a time allotted for Angra Mainyu to exercise its evil influence in
the world, a time mapped out for darkness to envelop the world. but this time is
limited and the superior power of Ahura Mazda will regain control over the
force of evil. Ahura Mazda would be accompanied with the ‘Holy Immortals’ in
the final battle to overthrow the beast of destruction. The Holy Immortals were
specifically created for this crucial task of assisting Ahura Mazda.
Duality is a Las of the Cosmos
Everything in the cosmos goes through a period of activity and rest, just like the
days and nights created by planetary rotation. Day and night are not limited to
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

96

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

our galaxy or to our planet earth alone. On a grand cosmic level, there is periods
of activity and period of repose.
In Sanskrit, a cosmic day is known as
MANVANTARA while a cosmic night is called PRAlAYA. Manvantara is a
period of activity. Pralaya is a period of repose. Being alive means being in
Manvantara. Death implies Pralaya. The ancient understood there is seven
cosmic laws that governs all manifestation. Seven Manvantaras or cosmic days
make up one great cosmic day. One great cosmic day is known as known as
Mahamanvantaras and it equals 311,040,000,000,000 in earth years (Aun-Weor.
2014). In the same way, seven cosmic nights (Pralayas) Make up one great cosmic
night (mahapralaya). The Sanskrit word ‘Maha” stands for “great” in English
Language.
Within our planetary realm we experience this symphony of dualism in multiple
forms. From reading the paper one must have come to the awareness by now of
how the ancient described this state of inertia and movement in terms of the war
between the gods—one is good and the other evil. There is no gainsaying the fact
that a sense of epistemological duality pervades human perception of the
universe. The ancient understood this very well. Without duality it would be
impossible for anything to be perceived, interpreted and understood by the
human intellect.
Chaos vs order, negative vs positive, darkness vs light, day vs night, life vs
death, right vs left, female vs. Male, evil vs good, spirit vs matter, inert vs
activity, God vs the devil etc. Anyone who truly research Manichaean dualism
will arrive at an undeniable fact that duality do in fact endlessly exist in space
and time. The concept of duality has generated much philosophical and
theological discuss throughout history. Another way duality manifest is seasonal
cyclical changes. Sometimes the ancient interpreted cyclical changes as duality
between good and evil. In the west, winter is seen as the time of death
(entombment), spring on the underhand is equated with resurrection. It is no
coincidence that the Christian Easter celebration was encrypted to occur in
springtime. Spring is when vegetation comes back to life after long death from
winter cold. All through the ancient time, before Christianity, spring has always
been known as the time of resurrection from the death (Walter, 2014). Following
the council of Nicea in 325 A.D. the controllers, decided to affix Easter
celebration to coincide with the first Sunday following the full moon of the
spring equinox. Easter is an extension of pagan nature feast. Part of the ritual of
duality between light and dark hemispheres of the cosmos.

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

97

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

Cosmic Frequencies
The core of the cosmos is emitting frequencies nonstop. Star systems are
broadcasting information through encrypted spectra of light. The earth as has a
sound frequency known as the Schumann Resonance. This earth’s vibrational
resonance is designed to resonate with the human biology. Changes in the
geomagnetic field affects the biology of humans tremendously. Cosmic
frequency emissions come in form of wavelengths. The ancients, as I have
suggested above, spoke extensively about light and dark principles. These could
also be understood as different waves. They saw creation as coming from a core
which they referred to as the ‘tree of life.” This is the generative epicenter of
creation. Pythagoras alluded to the tree of life when he proposed that at the heart
of the cosmos is a ‘central fire.’ The tree of life is the point of Big Bang. Science
and religion agree there was point of origin of all things. The conflict lies in the
disagreement in attitude. The creative word of god and the vibratory expansive
explosion of the Big Bang are one and the same thing.
The universe oscillates between light and dark hemispheres as I suggested
above. Evidence of this is observed even in the systolic and dystopic oscillation
of the human heartbeat as well as the symphony rotation of day and night. This
is how everything within the visible light spectrum operates. The book of
Genesis described in terms of “night and day.” This is what we have been trying
to demonstrate in this paper by our previous citation of ancient cosmologies as
they relate to the concept of duality. The Chinese yin-yang symbol is perfect
example of activity and rest in cosmos, the synchronized duality. It is the
synchronistic sign of positive and negative oscillation.
This symbol presents to the mind a universal understanding of the chaos and
harmony. Like the Chinese yin and yang, the Mayan hunab ku is a symbol of
duality as well representing the oscillation of cosmic hemispheres. Duality in the
universe is not completely polarized. These opposites work in unison. It is this
theory that led many to argue that what we call evil and good are only a
manifestation of one unified conscious being (God). The limited human mind is
unable to understand reality from a grand cosmic scale. In ancient Mesopotamia
one sees the symbol of the god Ningishizda represented as two serpents
entwined on a pole. The two serpents indicate duality or the balance of
opposites. The pole represents the point or the axis, the balance. It appears the
serpents are engaged in a struggle. And the struggle is a forward movement
along the line of the pole which represent immutability, incorruptibility and
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

98

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

permanency. The two serpents represent change or the law change. Ningishizda
was described as “lord of the good tree.” In many ancient texts one encounters
the concept of “cosmic tree” referring cosmic axis from where creation emirates.
Ningishizda symbol is the first and the oldest imagery in the entire world
utilizing entwined serpent on a pole to represent cosmic duality (Colman, 2016).
The reader must have decoded by now that it is from this symbol that the
universal medical symbol—a staff with two entwined serpents derived from. It is
called the caduceus. Serpent symbolism appear in so many ancient myths. The
reason is that serpent was a perfect mental image the ancient used when
describing wavelengths emanating from the tree of life. The movement of snake
and wave was descried as similar. The state of inertia in the Hebrew bible
became animated by the geometrical creative wave forms which biblical writer
described as the voice of God speaking things into existence: “And God said let
there be light and there was light (Genesis 1:3). This act of speaking reality into
the initial chaotic formless void of darkness signified the mating of two
opposites. The voice of God going forth implies masculine energy uniting with
feminine energy (formless void or darkness). For the bible to propose that there
was darkness implies that there was something already in existence. This is a
further vindication of other preexisting reports by pre-biblical cultures that God
did not create ex-nihil but merely introducing order into the preexisting
primordial matter. As I mentioned somewhere above, the primordial matter,
void, space, darkness, formlessness or cosmic ocean stands for dark matter/dark
energy which is feminine. In order word, creation is 96 percent feminine 5
percent masculine. Since this is the case, how come the creator be represented as
a patriarchal chauvinistic energy. How come God be called father and not the
divine motherhood?
The ancient were right-brained. Thus, they did not represent reality in overly
abstract form as the materialistic modern left brained-based people do. Kemetic
hieroglyphics, Hebrew alphabet are example of right brain ideograms.
Zoomorphic expressions were often employed by the ancient in the explanation
of being qua being, all right brain hemisphere.
Ancient Serpent Zoomorphism as Symbol of Cosmic Wave Movement
Many people are familiar with the symbol of two serpents entwined around a
central pole. This is called the caduceus. The caduceus symbol has been utilized
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

99

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

to represent medical field in our modern world. Many people are familiar with
Moses in the bible lifting a serpent on a pole. He was mimicking preexisting
ancient caduceus mystery but because his religion tended to eliminate the
feminine part of the universe, he only had one serpent indicating his YHWH
patriarchy. The creation of the caduceus indicated that the ancient geared
towards right brain ideogramic representation. The Serpent symbolized for the
ancient the movement of cosmic waves or creation waves. A keen observer will
notice that snakes move like waves. So, there was no better animal to represent
wave movement than the snake. Our modern minds have been controlled by the
controllers to think of serpent as virtually evil due to the zoomorphic myth
appearing in the book of Genesis. However, serpent symbolism was not
conceived as evil in the minds of the ancient.
Two serpents entwined on a pole rather represents two waves frequencies
expressing themselves in cosmic duality. That is, the dark and the light
hemisphere of the cosmos. It represents balance and harmony or the unification
of opposites. Medical science utilized this simple to suggest that medicine and
medical practices were supposed to foster biopsychospiritual wellbeing—balance
between mind and matter or spirit and body. Mind and body still point to a
sense of duality. Western medical science has long fallen into unadulterated
materialistic reductionism in term of understanding of the human
psychospiritual and material wholistic existence which caduceus symbolizes.
Duality must be united for new creation to emerge; this is a cosmic law.
Balancing the opposite is being like the creator. The essence of the creator is not
patriarchal sadistic genocidal dictator as we were taught in most of the major
world religions. The creator is both male and female principle in unison. The
cosmic balance which the ancients spoke about has been turned into synthetic
religion of male superiority and female inferiority. The suppression of feminine
aspect of the creator is not just unbalance but infectious evil in the minds of the
people. In order world, the real creatrix is more appropriate in terms of the
nature of God than creator. The invention of male creator came as a result of
switch from right brain consciousness to left brain consciousness. Right left-brain
consciousness brought patriarchal and dominated the global spiritual
worldview. To understand this, we need to understand the cosmic association
between light and dark hemisphere of the cosmos which affects the overall
human consciousness.
The Tree of Life and the Galactic Core

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

100

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

Modern science now validates ancient view that the cosmos is a sea of energy.
This is what the scientists refer to as dark matter and dark energy. Dark matter
and dark energy comprise 96 percent of the entire cosmos. This is the feminine
aspect of existence. On the other hand, visible light spectrum represents only 5
percent of reality. This five percent is understood to be left-brain(masculine). I
suggest that whatever created this whole reality is more of a divine motherhood
than “God the father”. I also posit that the knowable reality is only a tiny fraction
of what exists. Our biological sense perception is not designed to perceive higher
vibratory light frequencies existing within the described cosmic sea of energy.
Modern science is trying with special equipment picking up higher wave forms.
Creation wave carries codes via light spectra to different densities.
As I have described earlier, the ancient identified this dark matter with the
primordial ocean, water of nun, the deep, or the primordial chaos. Our milky
way galaxy has a central sun. The sun’s procession through the dark space is in
the form of vortex of movement dragging along planets as it moves. The sun is
not stationary with planets running around it as the bible depicted. This biblical
geocentric thinking has been changed since the time of Nicolaus Copernicus
(1473 --1543). The entire milky way system is moving through the infinite
darkness of the cosmos. Our sun as one of the billions of stars in this galaxy, is in
turn is, orbiting even a bigger sun system. This sun system has been identified as
Sirius which is in the constellation of Canis Major. From Canis we get the name
dog. Canis also gives us the word K9, referring to dog. This is because, Canis is
called the Dog Star. Why is Canis called the dog star. It is because in Kemet,
Canis is associated with the god of the underworld, Anubis (Anpu). Anubis is a
deity with dog head. Dog head indicates his extraordinary ability for higher
perception, his knows everything. This is another case of zoomorphism. One
wonders why the name god is an anagram of the word dog. Some researchers
are making connection with dog headed god Anubis. All religious system as we
can see is traceable to ancient Africa. Since the gravitational magnetism of Sirius
star has controlling effect on our galaxy, it is not surprised that the Anubis astromythology identified him with the word god as an anagram of dog or Canis.
Most language has esoteric dimension to it.
There are millions of galaxies and containing trillions of stars and planets and
none is stationary. Nothing in the heavens is still. So, this implies every space
body responding to a greater magnetic field. They are all orbiting other bodies
more massive and more forceful than themselves. This indicates that everything

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

101

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

in the universe is spiraling around acound a central core. This is what the ancient
described as the “tree of life.”
Creation Waves Emanating from Cosmic Axis
During the 1920s, George Lamaitre, a Belgian catholic priest and an astronomer,
shocked the world when he proposed the famous Big Bang Theory. Through his
astute astronomical observation, he concluded that the universe has a point of
origin. He extrapolated that this point of origin is to be found in the primordial
atom. Thus, he confirmed what the ancients already knew. Cognizance of the
potential theological implication, Pope Pius XII reactively affirmed that
Lamaitre’s new assertion relative to existence of the observable universe did not
counterbalance established ecclesiastical creation system. Lamaitre, true to
scientific principle maintained a total neutrality to this papal lure. He advised the
papacy to limit public discussion on the implication of his finding. The papacy
understood that the trajectory of Big Bang Theory would be blamed on the
church. This is because Big Band theory has always been understood as a satanic
materialist view of reality. This was an expensive satire for a church concerned
with her image in the world.
What stood out in Lamaitre’s theoretical assertion, however, was that the
universe has continued to expand since creation. The notion of expanding
universe was later substantiated by Albert Einstein as well as the American
astronomer Edwin Hubble. The use of sophisticated astronomical machines has
led to the discovery of Cosmic Microwave Background radiation (CMBR).
CMBR is the left-over radiation from the Big Bang which continues to expand. As
I indicated somewhere above, the Big Bang is equivalent to the voice of the
creator as described in the book of Genesis. Voice signifies sound frequency. For
the purpose of this paper, I will define sound as electromagnetic wave that
carries energy. The energy coming from Big Bang is in the form of gamma rays
(Delsemme, 1998). Today research in CMBR, has shown that distribution of
temperature in the universe is traced to a singular point of origin, the singularity.
Creation waves carries information which are coded and transmuted through
geometrical patterns. It is this geometrical pattern that the ancient referred to as
the ‘flower of life’ (Melchizedek,1998). The existence of the flower of life or
geometrical pattern induced by sound frequency has now been proven by simple
experimental studies called cymatics. Anyone can carry out this experiment.
Cymatics has shown that sound vibration carries three-dimensional vibration
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

102

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

hologram. Thus, the connection between the voice of the creator (Big Bang) and
physical reality is clear. The voice of God (sound frequency) is what created
physical reality or dense matter. It appears the law of cymatics is the law of the
entire cosmos. Also, I it worth noting that the tree of life is coded on everything
that is. This is the blueprint of creation.
Not until recently physicist still held unto the classical view of matter. Studies in
quantum physics now provide us with evidence that atom are in the state of
probability. Therefore, matter exists in a state of potentiality and it is
consciousness or the observer that influences the state of its materialization. This
new information came from an experiment scientist call the “Double Slit
Experiment.” When placed in controlled observation, atoms behave in a wave
form as well as like particles. Everything is wave and everything follows a
frequency. The behavior of electrons has no definable particle and position
within an atom. It exists as quanta of light called photon which is not locatable in
space and time depending on the observer’ observation.
Impact of Light Frequencies from The Galactic Core
The entire reality runs on electromagnetic frequency. Some of the spectra of light
frequencies include gamma rays, x-rays, ultraviolent rays, infrared, microwave,
radio wave as well as long waves. I posit there might be others still which is
undetectable using scientific and technological equipment. These frequencies
carry information from the galactic core. There is overwhelming evidence to
support the fact that evolution of the human consciousness is highly determined
by light frequencies. The entire structure of the cosmos is broadcasting intense
pulsation containing evolutionary data. We are carbon-based beings. Carbon is
so abundant in the universe. Carbon is the basis of life on this planet. This begs
the question: Where did carbon come from.? Astrobiologist affirm that carbons
are stardust. That is, leftover particles from the death of stars. Thus, our link with
the stars is undeniable.
Ecclesiastical authorities (the church) has a history of condemning knowledge
and study of celestial bodies in relation to their influence on the biosphere.
Certainly, these is a covert operation by the church to control the people from
understanding the nature of this reality. This is what unmitigated attacks on
astrology is all about down through the history. How can we live in a universe
full of cosmic light frequencies without being influenced by them? The moon is a
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

103

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

typical example. As minuscule as it is when compared to other space bodies, the
moon exerts tremendous biopsychological influence earth. Some researchers now
believe that the moon acts as an incubator to all biological organism on this
planet. the female menstrual cycle is regulated by the moon. Then English word
lunatic has the Latin word Luna in it. Luna simply mean the mood. There is
studies now which link full moon to rise in animal bites as well as psychological
disorders in humans. In the west, there is high cases of mental health
disturbances during winter season. Studies has pointed to a correlation between
reduced amount of solar activities with depression for example (Broers, 2012).
There is a correlation between direct sunlight and severe clinical problems. The
bottom line is that cosmic rays affect life on earth positively or negatively. A
research publication tittle Clinical Cosmobiology has linked sudden cardiac
attack and varieties of other sudden deaths with extreme disturbances in
geomagnetic field caused by sporadic solar activities (Stoupel et al, 2006). There
have also been scientific studies correlating rise in crime with solar activities
Every microscopic particle of matter contains the seed of consciousness. Atoms
and sub-atoms have in an intelligent manner. Cells behave in an intelligent
manner. Thus, the human atomic and molecular structures respond to the
electromagnetic interaction of light frequencies coming from the core of the
cosmos. The core of the cosmos is constantly emitting gamma rays. Due to the
vastness of the cosmos it takes millions of years for these rays to reach us in our
little corner of this planet. Our sun is estimated to be 93 million miles from the
earth. Thus, earths geomagnetic field is influenced by solar activities (Broers,
2012). When solar storm is triggered by atomic combustion of helium and
hydrogen, it takes about three days for the charged solar photons to reach the
earth. Solar activities trigger solar thunderstorm discharging more particles
towards earth surface. The atomic particles existing between the ionosphere and
earth’s electromagnetic field are charged by solar energy. It the charged particles
in the ionosphere that triggers lightning and thunderstorm as we know it. This
thunderstorm generates electromagnetic energy waves called atmospherics.
Atmospherics are key to the creation of amino acid which is the basis of life on
earth. If the stars are instrumental creating prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells that
led to whole organism, how would anyone deny that the same electromagnetic
field force from the stars has influences on the evolution of consciousness on
earth.
The creator designed the body to receive these cosmic light frequencies. How
does this happen? The human Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) is there to act just
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

104

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

like radio or tv antennas which transduce these cosmic frequencies into the
systems of the human bodies. This is how life evolves. In order words it is light
frequencies that activates our biopsychospiritual codes. The DNA is “light
encoded filament” (Marciniak 1992). The phrase light encoded means
information loaded. Its functions are to received data from the cosmic axis i.e.
the tree of life in order to update the systems. Evolution therefore follows
frequencies emitting from interstellar star systems. As stated earlier, our sun has
a tide just like the sea which rises and falls. The emission and fluctuation of the
solar tide is a response to greater gravitational pull of a bigger star gravity and
electromagnetism. As big as our sun is, it orbits other suns. Some researchers
believe that our sun follows Sirius star system. It is Sirius that triggers the
diastolic/systolic tidal wave of our sun. The ancient understood this. They knew
that the yin-yang cosmic polarity coming from deep space has a real effect on
this earth. Radio astronomers understood this fact as well. There are invisible
electromagnetic fields all around us. Radio and television stations broadcast
information to their receivers based on manipulating cosmic light frequencies
which is known as radio waves.
The prime creator/creatrix understands that every universe needs a conscious
observer. In fact, a universe void of consciousness is not possible. Therefore, the
teleology of creation is consciousness. The end goal of man is consciousness. The
future is evolving towards perfection of consciousness. It is through cosmic
consciousness that the creator does self-introspection. I posit this logic, if
creation reflects the creator, the creator must be looking at his reflection then.
The pineal gland has been studied and understood as the seat of human spiritual
awareness consciousness. St. Augustine of Hippo following preexisting ancient
knowledge stated that the pineal gland is the point of interaction between mind
and body or between spirit and matter. Here he again acknowledged Manichean
dualism which he condemned. The production of melatonin by the pineal gland
is controlled by solar activities. Again, the point is that the electromagnetic field
which pervades the cosmos is the engine that drives the evolution of the human
consciousness.
Geodetic Alignments
The ancient understood waves frequencies than we give them credit for. Ancient
geodetic markers have been observed all over the world. Geodesy deals with
surveying the surface of the earth to understand specific point in the earth’s
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

105

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

surface. Part of geodesy studies earth’s gravity fields. The ancient understood
planetary lay lines, electromagnetism and gravitational fields. Some scholars
now reveal that the Great Pyramid in Kemet is a geodetic marker aligned to
transduce certain frequencies on this earth. Pyramids are found in Africa, China,
the Americas, Japan and so many other locations around the earth. The Great
Pyramid is positioned on the intersection of 3oo North and longitude 600 East
which many consider perfect alignment to the north (Hart, 2003). The strategic
positions of these pyramids and other stone monuments around the world have
been said to follow not only certain strategic planetary alignments and grids but
also that of galactic light frequencies. The great Giza Pyramids shows that they
are aligned perfectly to the tree star systems of the Orion star belt—Alnilam,
Mintaka and Alnitak. The Great Pyramid is at the center of the planet earth. Did
ancient Kemet build this pyramid to transduce electromagnetic frequencies from
the deep stars to the earth through lay lines and planetary grids? This is food for
thought.
Brainwaves
As indicated above, the cosmos has a frequency, the universe has a resonance
frequency, the earth has a frequency, and so are the star systems. These
frequency broadcast of waves act as evolutionary activation. Similarly, the brain
emits frequency as well. The planet earths resonance, Schumann Resonance,
emits frequencies that resonates with brainwaves as well as the pulsation of the
human heart. The 7.83Hz frequency of the earth resonates particularly with the
Alpha Brainwave. The U.S Psychotronic conference during the 1970s reported on
the synchronicity between Schumann Resonance and Alpha Brainwave. Alpha
Brainwave is associated with psychic abilities and intuition (Jones et al, 2009).
It was the German psychiatrist Hans Berger in 1924 who invented
Electroencephalography. This device is used in measuring electrical nano
charges in the brain. Neural oscillation triggers billions of electrical pulsations.
The human brain has certain beat. The brain like every electrical and magnetic
field in the universe emits is full of electricity. Hertz is the unit of frequency in
which neuronal vibrational pulse is measured. The different types of brainwaves
are often depicted to correspond with five Greek letters. These include: Gamma
brainwave - indicates a frequency ranges between 32-100 cycles per second. In
this brainwave there is a heightened neuro activity creating intensification in
mental concentration. Beta Brainwaves, 13-32 cycles per second and associated
with agitated and intense mental focus or awareness. Alpha Brainwaves
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

106

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

frequency ranges between 8-13 cycles per second which is associated with
relaxed and alert Theta Brainwaves with frequency ranging between 4-8 cycles
per second. This state is characterized by creativity, dream state, fantasy,
intuition, imagery etc. Delta Brainwaves indicate a frequency range between 0.5 –
4 cycles per second and it is associated with a state of pure sleep.
The geomagnetic frequency with its electromagnetic field in do interface with
neuronal waves. The biopsychospiritual circadian rhythm is regulated by the
pituitary gland located in the brain. The pituitary gland has a direct resonance
with cosmic light frequencies. The brain has a correlation with the invincible
photons of light (Broers, 2012). Thus, electrical activities in the geomagnetic field
influences changes in the human consciousness.
Expanded state of
consciousness is possible by downloading frequencies (data) from the cosmos.
Solar wave emits activation data. These codes are crucial for mental evolution.
Generally, the earth cannot do without solar energy. Solar photons are necessary
for sustaining biological lives on this planet. Ancient people were not stupid
when they venerated the Sun of God. Exposure to certain solar magnetic field
could induce spiritual awakening through direct activation of some of the
endocrine systems such as the pineal gland and the pituitary gland. There is no
gainsaying the fact that the creator speaks only through these frequencies and
resonance vibrations.
Cosmic Waves and Civilization in Third Century B.C.E
Around 3115 B.C.E, human consciousness took a giant leap forward. There was a
massive download of galactic wavelength frequencies. This led to global rise
and spread of significant inventions as well as complex cities and civilizations.
Prior to third century B.C.E, societies were organized around micro agrarian
families with shamanism as the main religious concept. Obviously, many
researched found that there was a great morphological jump in the human bioneurology which lead to evolution in consciousness. Egypt, Mesopotamia,
Anatolia as well as the Indus Valley were some of the societies that emerged
supreme at this period. Researchers believe that the human mind received
mental shift. It was as if humanity woke up the next day to realize their brain has
evolve exponentially. Social stratification, political leadership and architectures
completely tool new and advanced direction.
People started to reason
differently. This is because the galactic frequency resonated with the planet earth
geomagnetic field thereby activating the dormant mind. Social inequality rose
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

107

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

with the rise of cities. Monarchies were instituted. From agrarian religious
shamanism to the institution of elaborate exploitative priestly clans.
Cosmic Waves and Religious Changes during the 5th Century B.C.E.
Another galactic wave frequency reached the earth and was downloaded by the
human consciousness B.C.E. 500. This frequency triggered activated of the
dormant human consciousness and directed it towards patriarchal religious
institutions. Matriarchy was fought and etched out. This was the period of the
rise of major religions and theosophical systems we know in the world today.
Few of these include, Confucius in China, Tzolkin in Mesoamerica, prince
Siddhartha Gautama (Buddha) of Buddhism, Mahavira of Janism, Zarathustra of
Zoroastrianism, Pythagoras and his salvific philosophy etc. It was after the
Babylonian exile in 597 BCE that the repressive zealous Shelanite-Judah elites
forced their cult of yahwehism on the consciousness of mankind (Asher,2013).
Patriarchal yahwehism continues to dominate the religious awareness of
majority of people on this planet as evidenced by Judaism, Christianity and
Islam, the three Abrahamic religions.
The 17th Century Age of Enlightenment
With the 17th century, a new cosmic light frequency was download by the
human mind. This was the age of philosophy. In conventional term, this period
is known as the age of rationalism. Previous cosmic wavelengths activation
frequencies gave way to even more extreme a left-brain hologram. Reason
substituted ignorance and superstitious. This period is also known for its
atheism, the godless man was emerging. The man who will recreate the whole
earth in his image This is called teraformation. The age of rationalism ushered in
the emergence of soulless characters which later philosophers talked about.
Nietzsche spoke about the coming of the “superman. Machiavelli described the
coming of the soulless “Prince.” Mary Shelley wrote about the abomination
called “Frankenstein.” George Orwell’s book titled 1884 tells about the “Big
Brother” who will control everyone’s life in a dictatorial soulless digital world.
Everyone would be reduced to slave. Orwell went on to describe the hunting
state of the planet earth in the following dystopic symbolisms— Oceania, Eurasia
and Eastasia. These are esoteric metaphors. Aldous Huxley book A Brave New
World talked about the almighty state oligarchs utilizing mass mind control via
psychotronic weapons, medication mass hypnosis to dominate and reprogram
all humans on earth. Even though, it appears that the wave downloaded during
enlightenment was meant to free humans from the gods and from the bondage of
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

108

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

addictive ignorance of religious indoctrination, it viewed the world into a more
left-brain based reality. The shift in mental state was tremendous. Towering
figures like John Locke, Jean-Jack Rousseau, Voltaire, David Hume, Adam Smith,
Montesquieu, Denis Diderot, Spinoza, Immanuel Kant, Mendelssohn as well as a
whole lot more were receiving activations of the left-brain hemisphere and
consequently the domination of scientific west received a universal welcome on
this planet. Galactic activation energy from the 17th century shifted human
perception to a completely new dimension.
The 1990s Wave Frequencies—Digital Revolution
The 90s brought in a unique shift in the human mental awareness. Again, this
was evolution towards left-brain as well. It appears the scientific man was fully
awakened. This shift directed evolution along two futuristic paths—cybernetics
and genetics. This two would merge as symbiotes. From this point a terminology
is now emerging in the human consciousness “onto-biosynthetic”. This means
that this earth is in the process of being transformed form bio-organism to ontomechanical-artificial synthetic planet. This is part the dystopic vision that led to
the completion of the sequencing of the human genome in in 2003 in what is now
known as the great “human Genome Project.”
The was the first human initiation to transhumanism. It was during this period
that the human brain started downloading left-brain frequency. What we now
call World Wide Web (www)was initiated by the elite in the year 1989. The
cybernetic world was ushered in, the age of machines is here. Today everyone
has a digital existence which is going to increase exponentially soon. We would
not fully understand what this means until Singularity is finally reached. The era
of digital technology has defined the whole of this planetary future. Human
consciousness is led towards the entrapment of souls into the cybernetic
machines’ universe. It is a matter of time before cyborgs take over the world.
police officer of the future will be cyborgs and androids. Cyborg means
cybernetic organism. Computer will attend the level of intelligent which will
make man appear imbecilic. Synthetic futurist such as Ray Kurzweil in his book
titled The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human
Intelligence, Mr. Kurzweil forecast that by the year 2050 the age of singularity
would have been perfected on this planet. The Age of Singularity alludes to a
time when computers would rule over humans. The synchronicity between man
and machine would be perfected by this time. There will be humans who receive
digital enhancement and those who chose not to. Those who refuse to be infused
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

109

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

with synthetic machines and nanobots would find it difficult to operate in the
future cybernetic world. systems like Facial Recognition is already in use. Very
soon it would be possible to go through the airport with no passport. Just show
your face to a cyborg camera and your retina scan is completed. Your data is
pulled up. Already we are witnessing how the scientist are creating synthetic
blood and other body parts. This is how the concept of prosthesis came about,
replacing biological organism with synthetic artificial parts. The U.S and other
world powers now have enhanced solders. That is, human soldiers who are
infuse with digital codes and whose performance seems out of this world.
Cybernetic Anthropomorphous Machine Systems (CAMS)are a reality today. The
superpowers now have in their possession intelligent and highly animated
exoskeletal machines, bionics, teleoperators, etc., to do whatever inhuman act
they want to do. Psychotronic weapons is not a reality. Weapons that targets
specific brain wave through electromagnetic field. Using gun to fight is now like
stone age technology. Many people are not aware of this.
Robotics, biocybernetics, synthetic mechatronics and other scary nanobots have
been unleashed since the 1990s. Actual explosion in cybernetic thinking came
around 1999 and continues to rise exponentially in this 21st century and beyond.
Humanity is now looking forward to entering the nano holographic cyberworld
where they will be enslaved on a soul level. This is what Nigerian born American
Scientist Philip Emeagwuali termed man attending “digital immortality.”
Cosmic Day and Night and Mind Activation
The brain has both right and left hemisphere. These hemisphere as I pointed out
earlier corresponds to the light and dark hemispheres of the cosmos. They also
correspond today and night. The geographic location of the West corresponds to
certain cosmic hemispheres of the universe. It is this specific hemisphere that
activates the overly left-brain anti-spirituality scientific so-called prowess of the
West. The Eastern as well as the Southern hemispheres of this planet are aligned
differently, to the right brain-hemisphere. That is why spirituality is more
prevalence in both the Eastern and Southern hemispheres. People who live in
these cosmic emitting wave frequencies tend to value visual symbolism,
wholistic approach, intuition, dance, spirituality etc. Compare this to the West
more attuned to individuality, logic, scientific reductionism etc. All these has to
do with duality of our cosmic system which the ancients interpreted as the fight
between light and darkness or the fight between good god and evil god.
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

110

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

Everything in existence oscillates between periods of activity and periods of rest.
In our earth language it is called day and night. We could understand this by
studying the systolic and dystonic rhythm of the heart. The contrasting and
relaxing pulsation of the hearth is in response to the pattern in existence. Just as
their rhythm hoof day and night on earth. There is also cosmic day and night.
Conclusion
In following the topic of discussion--Igwebuike, I attempted to explore the unity
of reports by the ancients that in the beginning of creation there was a cosmic sea
of energy. I argued that this sea of energy is what modern science now identify
with dark mater or dark energy. I equally argued that when the ancients talked
about duality especially the fight between evil and good, they implied
anisotropic principles in the cosmos. In this context, anisotropic principle is used
to indicated that the earth, galaxy and the entire cosmos oscillate between light
and dark hemispheres. Just as there is day and night on earth, there is day and
night on a grand cosmic level. This is that is referred to in Sanskrit as
Mahavantara and Pralaya There is period of activity and rest in all reality or
organic and inorganic. Manichaeism was right to a greater extent when he
philosophized that there are two eternally co-existing forces in battle. Although
this philosophy offends religions sensibility, nevertheless Manicheanism was
reflecting on the reality of our existence. I have also argued that the separation of
the brain into right and left hemispheres correspond to the greater cosmic
hemisphere. I discussed that creation had beginning. However, in line with the
ancient, beginning does implied ex-nihil. It rather means introducing order in the
state of chaos. I indicated that when the brain is aligned with certain cosmic light
frequencies (night) it leads to de-evolution. When it is aligned to the right
hemisphere of the cosmos it reaches a synchronistical alignment with balance.
When the earth is attuned to the right brain the Sanskrit call it Sat Yuga, the
Golden Age.
The Sanskrit described certain cycles that our planet goes through. These cycles
no doubt corresponds with day/night cosmic oscillation. According to Sanskrit,
the age of left brain, logical reductionism, individualism and selfishness is the
age of Kali Yuga. This is where we are now, the age of vanity, material science,
debasement and evil. On the other hand, the age of Sat Yuga corresponds with
the age of wholeness, community, harmony, intuition, spirituality, connectedness
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

111

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

etc. I have presented some argument with historical records suggesting that
when the ancient talk about god engaging in endless fight (good and evil) they
were speaking about light and dark sides of the same one cosmos. Sometimes
these came in form of anthropomorphism. At other times it came in form of
zoomorphism. But because modern world is rationalistic and tend to use left
brain more, it is difficult to comprehend the ancient without reducing the very
advanced thinking to superstitious mytho. Left brain is good in reductionism.
Empirical science is purely a produce of left-brain reductionism. In the distant
past, the world was not organized this way. At certain time in the distant past, it
would appear unimaginable to look at god as “father” instead of as androgyny
with feminine predominance. In calculating, I would argue that because the
cosmos is cyclical, Western science will in the future fizzle out and the world
would return to a balance right-brain universe.
I did not claim to have covered all necessary historical changes as a result of the
human consciousness downloading waves corresponding today/night cosmic
hemispheres. This paper is limited to go into such detail. However, this little
discussion provides inquisitive researchers platform to delve further into
unpopular research fields not promoted by academic statues quo. In order
world, this is not a conclusion but the beginning of a discussion.
References
1. Amit Goswami, PhD, The Self-Aware Universe: How Consciousness Creates the
Material World, (New York: Penguin, 1993)
2. Houjun Mo, Frank van den Bosch, Simon White, Galaxy Formation and
Evolution (Uninted Kingdom, Cambridge: United Press, 2010)
3. Gerald L. Schroeder, PhD, Genesis and the Big Bang Theory: The Discovery Of
Harmony Between Modern Science and the Bible (New York: Random House
Publishing, 1990)
4. Cheikh Anta Diop, Civilization or Barbarism: An Authentic Anthropology
(Chicago Illinois: Chicago Review Press Inc, 1981)
5. Alasdair A. MacDonald, Weder R. W. M. Von Martels, Jan Riepke
Veenstra, Christian Humanism: Essays in Honor of Arjo Vanderjagt, ( Denvers
MA: Drill, 2009)
6. Geraldine Pinch, Handbook of Egyptian Mythology (San Barbara, California:
ABC-CLIO, 2002)
7. David P. Silverman, Ancient Egypt (New York: Oxford University Press,
1997)

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

112

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

8. Brenda Rosen, The Mythical Creatures Bible: The Definitive Guide to Legendary
Beings (New York: Sterling Publishing Company Inc., 2009)
9. Ewa Wasilewska, Creation Stories of the Middle East, (London, England:
Jessica Kingsley Publishers Ltd, 2000)
10. Gerald Massey, Egyptian Wisdom and the Hebrew Genesis (New York:
Cosimo Inc, 2008)
11. Henri Frankfort, Kingship and the Gods: A Study of Ancient Near East Religion
as the integration of Society and Nature, (U.S.A: Chicago University Press,
1978)
12. Michael Starsheen, Tales of the Egyptian Gods, (Rt.Rev. Michael Starsheen,
2018)
13. Stephanie Dalley, Myths from Mesopotamia: Creation, The Flood, Gilgamesh,
and Others, (New York: Oxford University Press,1989)
14. Russell Gmirkin, Berossus and Genesis, Manetho and Exodus: Hellenistic
Histories and the Date of he Pentateuch, (New York: T&T Clark International,
2006)
15. Ross Marshall, Noah's Ark and the Genesis 10 Patriarchs (Ross Marshall,
1991)
16. David I. Owen, Neo-Sumerian Archival Texts Primarily from Nippur in the
University Museum, the Oriental Institute and the Iraq Museum (U.S.A:
Eisenbrauns, 1982)
17. Nicholas De Vere, The Dragon Legacy: The Secret History of an Ancient
Bloodline (Book Tree, 2004) p. 375.
18. Irvin Finkle, The Ark Before Noah: Decoding the Story of the Flood, (pub.
By Nana. Talese: Irvin Finkle, 2014)
19. Zacharia Sitchin, Genesis Revisited: Is Modern Science Catching Up with
Ancient Knowledge? (New York: Harper Collins, 1990)
20. Will Hart, The Genesis Race: Our Extraterstrial DNA and the True Origin of the
Species, (Copyright, Will Hart, 2003)
21. Yosef Ben-Jochannan, A Chronology of the Bible: Challenge to the
Standard Version, (Boltimore MD: Black Classic Press, 1973).
22. Robert Bauval and Thomas Brophy, Black Genesis: The Prehistoric Origins of
Ancient Egypt, (Bear & Company: 2011)
23. Gary Greenberg, 101 Myths of the Bible: How the Scribes Invented Biblical
Stories, (Naperville, Illinois: Gary Greenbuerg, 2000)
24. Jean Doresse, The Secret Books of the Egyptian Gnostics: An Introduction to the
Recently Discovered Ancient Manuscript That Rival the Dead Sea Scrolls In
importance, (New York, MJF Books, 1986).

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

113

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

25. Ramananda Prasad, Song of God, (Fremont, California: The American Gita
Society, 1995)
26. Ev Cochrane, Fossil Gods and Forgotten Worlds, (Lulu Press, 2010)
27. Mahrdad Kia, The Persian Empire: A Historical Encyclopedia (Volume 2),
(Santa Barbara, California, 2016)
28. John Kevin Coyle, Manichaeism and Its Legacy, (Koninklijke Brill, 2009)
29. Faheem Judah-El, The Ancient Science of Vibration: The Teachings of Tehuti
(Axium Publications, 2015)
30. Jon Steward, The Unity of Hegel's "Phenomenology of Spirit: A Systematic
Interpretation, (Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press, 2002)
31. Mary K. Wakeman, God's Battle with the Monster: A Study in Biblical
Imagery, ( Brill, 1973)
32. Zecharia Sitchin, The 12th Planet (Book I) (The First Book of the Earth
Chronicles), (Bear & Company: 1977)
33. Timothy Beal, Religion and Its Monsters, (New York: Rautledge, 2002)
34. Philippe Walter, Christian Mythology: Revelations of Pagan Origins, (2nd
Edition), (Inner Traditions: 2014)
35. Samael Aun-Weor, The Revolution of Beelzebub: The Demon who Renounced
Evil and the Man who Guided Him, (Glorian Publishing, 2014)
36. Carl Johan Calleman PhD, The Purposeful Universe: How Quantum
Theory and Mayan Cosmology Explain the Origin and Evolution of Life
(Bear & Company, 2009)
37. Laid Scranton, Seeking the Primordial (Copyright, Laid Scranton, 2017).
38. Marie D. Jones, Larry Flaxman, The Resonance Key: Exploring the Links
Between Vibration, Consciousness, and the Zero Point Grid (New Page Book,
2009)
39. Drunvalo Melchizedek, The Ancient Secret of the Flower of Life, Volume 1
(Flagstaf AZ: Light Technology Publication, 1998)
40. Stoupel Et al (2006), Clinical Cosmobiology - Sudden Cardiac Death and Daily /
Monthly Geomagnetic, Cosmic Ray and Solar Activity - the Baku Study, (20032005) (Sun and Geosphere, 2006; 1(2): 13-16) ISSN 1819-0839
41. Kanu, I. A. (2015a). African philosophy: An ontologico-existential hermeneutic
approach to classical and contemporary issues. Augustinian Publications.
42. Kanu I. A. (2015b). A Hermeneutic Approach to African Traditional Religion,
Theology and Philosophy. Augustinian Publications.
43. Kanu, I. A. (2016a). Igwebuike as a Trend in African philosophy:
IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities. 2. 1. 97-101
(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

114

IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities Vol. 5 No 7, September 2019. ISSN: 2488-9210(Online) 2504-9038(Print)

44. Kanu, I. A. (2016b). Igwebuike as an Igbo-African Hermeneutic of
Globalization: IGWEBUIKE: An African Journal of Arts and Humanities. 2. 1.
1-7
45. Kanu, I. A. (2014). Suffering in Igbo-African Ontology. Research in
Humanities and Social Sciences 4. 5. 8-13
46. Kanu, I. A. (2015a). Igwebuike as the Consumate Foundation of African
Bioethical Principles: A paper presented at the International Conference on
Law, Education and Humanities. 25th -26th November 2015 University of
Paris, France.
47. Kanu, I. A. (2015b). Igwebuike as an Ontological Precondition for African
Ethics: International Conference of the Society for Research and Academic
Excellence, University of Nigeria, Nsukka. 14th -16th September.
48. Kanu, I. A. (2015c). “Igwebuike as an Igbo-African Philosophy of
Education”: A paper presented at the International Conference on Law,
Education and Humanities. 25th -26th November 2015 University of Paris,
France.
49. Kanu, I. A. (2015d). “Igwebuike as the Unity of the African Philosophical
Experience”: International Conference of the Society for Research and
Academic Excellence, University of Nigeria, Nsukka. 14th -16th
September.
50. Kanu, I. A. (2017). Igwebuike as a Wholistic Response to the Problem of
Evil and Human Suffering. Igwebuike: An African Journal of Arts and
Humanities Vol. 3 No 2, March 2017.

(A Publication of Tansian University, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies)

115

