healthcare
Article

The Effect of Low Frequency Sound on Heart Rate Variability
and Subjective Perception: A Randomized Crossover Study
Zdeněk Vilímek 1, *, Jiří Kantor 1 , Jakub Krejčí 2 , Zbyněk Janečka 2 , Zuzana Jedličková 2 , Anna Nekardová 1 ,
Michal Botek 2 , Monika Bucharová 1 and Elsa A. Campbell 1,3
1

2

3

*

Citation: Vilímek, Z.; Kantor, J.;
Krejčí, J.; Janečka, Z.; Jedličková, Z.;
Nekardová, A.; Botek, M.; Bucharová,
M.; Campbell, E.A. The Effect of Low
Frequency Sound on Heart Rate
Variability and Subjective Perception:
A Randomized Crossover Study.
Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024. https://
doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10061024

Center of Evidence-Based Education and Arts Therapies: A JBI Affiliated Group, Institute of Special
Education, Sciences, Faculty of Education, Palacký University Olomouc, 779 00 Olomouc, Czech Republic;
jiri.kantor@upol.cz (J.K.); anna.nekardova01@upol.cz or andulkanekardova@seznam.cz (A.N.);
monika.bucharova01@upol.cz (M.B.); elsa.campbell@caritas-ettlingen.de (E.A.C.)
Faculty of Physical Culture, Palacký University Olomouc, 771 11 Olomouc, Czech Republic;
jakub.krejci@upol.cz (J.K.); zbynek.janecka@upol.cz (Z.J.); zuzana.jedlickova01@upol.cz (Z.J.);
michal.botek@upol.cz (M.B.)
Caritas Association Ettlingen, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany
Correspondence: zdenek.vilimek01@upol.cz

Abstract: Background: Vibroacoustic therapy (VAT) uses low-frequency sound, often combined with
listening to music, for therapeutic purposes. However, the impact of low-frequency vibration (LFV)
on physiological functions and subjective perception is relatively unknown. Methods: We conducted
a randomized cross-over study with the aim of comparing the effect of constant LFV of 40 Hz, its
amplitude modulation, and the placebo condition on heart rate variability (HRV), stress perception
(measured by visual analogue scales for stress) and mood (measured by UWIST Mood Adjective
Check List). Results: Research experiments with various interventions (constant LFV with sound of
nature (river in forest), amplitude modulation of the same LFV with sounds of nature and sounds
of nature without LFV) were realised involving 24 participants. It was found there was an effect
on HRV, stress perception and mood after the interventions. However, there were only seldomly
experienced, and mostly nonsignificant, differences between the intervention conditions, so the
effects may be attributed to factors other than LFV. Conclusions: Large scale experimental studies are
needed to verify the preliminary findings and to explore various coinciding factors that may have
influenced the results of this study, e.g., type of autonomic nervous system. We propose that the effect
of LFV exposure may differ when combined with listening to music, and this hypothesis should be
investigated in future studies.

Academic Editor: Raffaele Giordano
Received: 25 March 2022

Keywords: vibroacoustic therapy; low frequency vibration; nature sound; heart rate variability;
subjective perception; cardiac autonomic regulation; stress; mood

Accepted: 23 May 2022
Published: 1 June 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in

1. Introduction

published maps and institutional affil-

Vibroacoustic therapy (VAT) is defined as a combination of low-frequency sound
vibration, (and) listening to music, combined with therapeutic interaction [1]; however,
there is great heterogeneity in the range of frequencies, usage of music and applying the low
frequency vibrations (LFVs) within a therapeutic relationship. This therapeutic approach
incorporates physical and auditory perception of both auditory sound and tactile vibration.
In research studies, the therapeutic relationship has been less discussed and, therefore, the
focus of the research has been on the tactile stimulus itself, this being the low frequency
vibration. There is also a tendency to research the effects of LFV without the addition of
the listening to music element that enables differentiating of the effect of music from the
effect of LFV [2]. Although this may lead to greater understanding of the standalone effects
of LFV, knowledge on these combined elements is lacking. Since anecdotal evidence from
clinical practice, as well as from some case reports, e.g., Campbell et al. [3], has shown that

iations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10061024

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/healthcare

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

2 of 18

some find LFV alone emotionally or physically stressful, music is often added to support
the psychological processing and because it may enhance the relaxation effect. Therefore,
more evidence is needed on the combined effects of LFV and music.
Vibroacoustic therapy can be easily altered to meet the specific needs and therapeutic
goals of the individual. This is enabled through adjusting different parameters of LFV
treatment programmes in various systems, such as Nextwave or VibLab. The frequencies
(Hz) used are based on years of clinical experience [4] and neuroscientific principles, such
as oscillation coherence [5]. In recent research, 40 Hz, either as a stand-alone frequency or as
the fundamental frequency within a treatment programme, has been used most commonly,
as it induces a whole-body relaxation response [3,6–8]. Amplitude refers to the loudness
peak from silence to the designated crest of a frequency. In the Nextwave system, the
pulsation or cycle refers to the speed of the amplitude change; the duration from silence
to the designated peak volume (in decibels). The strength/loudness is the intensity of the
stimulation, which can be altered according to each speaker or transducer in the device.
Finally, action or direction refers to whether the vibration moves from head to foot, vice
versa or remains fixed [9].
Years of clinical experience [10], as well as some research data, indicate VAT may be
used for stimulation of physiological functions, e.g., heart rate variability (HRV) [11–13],
which is the non-invasive index of autonomic cardiac regulation. Other physiological
functions sensitive to VAT include galvanic skin response [12], blood pressure [14–16],
or spasticity and movement [17,18]. Some studies report the effect of VAT on subjective
perception of stress [19–21]. There is a generally accepted hypothesis that VAT increases the
reactivity of cardiac vagal regulation and physical relaxation [12,22]. However, there is a
lack of research in this area. Most of the research cited was carried out in a traditional manner, combining music with LFV. Until now, we do not know much about the effect of LFV
when unaccompanied by musical intervention. There is also little research focused on the
comparison of different parameters of LFV, such as frequencies or amplitude modulation.
The aim of this research study was to compare the effect of two types of sinusoidal
signals on heart rate variability and subjective perception of stress: constant frequency
of 40 Hz and amplitude modulation of this frequency. Our hypothesis is that VAT will
stimulate increased cardiac vagal regulation and a feeling of subjective physical relaxation.
We used two types of vibroacoustic beds available at the Palacký University in Olomouc
(see Section 2.1) to generate the two different types of LFV and to compare the intervention
by constant (Carrier signal or wave) amplitudes of 40 Hz (generated on VIBRATICS I) with
the intervention of sequentially dosed amplitudes (generated on Vibrobed). We proposed
that VAT should have significant effect on the increase of cardiac vagal activity and decrease
blood pressure, and that this physiological effect should be reflected in decrease of stress
perception in participants.
2. Materials and Methods
The design of pre-test post-test randomized cross-over study with three interventions
in randomized order was used to:

•
•
•

Determine the effect of constant LFV with sounds of nature (sounds of river in the
forest) on heart rate variability.
Determine the effect of LFV with nature sounds on subjective perception of acute stress.
Determine the effect of LFV with nature sounds on participants’ mood.

This pilot study was conducted to prepare for a RCT study with a large group of
participants. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the Faculty of Education,
Palacký University in Olomouc (No. 5/2019). All participants were informed in advance
of the conditions of the research experiment, signed an informed consent (Appendix A)
and filled in the entry protocol (Appendix B). The sample of participants was created from
full-time students of the Faculty of Education and the Faculty of Physical Culture of Palacký
University in Olomouc. The assumption was that these students would be a sufficiently
homogeneous group to verify the assumptions, due to their small age range and similar

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

3 of 18

lifestyles. In addition, this sample can potentially benefit from the positive effects of VAT
due to the increased presence of acute stress [23,24]. However, in this study we recruited
students with any level of stress (see Strengths and limits of the study in Section 4). When
selecting study participants, we first addressed several groups of students from the Faculty
of Education and the Faculty of Physical Culture by e-mail. All students who agreed to
participate in the study, and met the inclusion criteria, were included in the study. All
participants received basic information about the goals and methods of conducting the
research survey and signed informed consents before the first meeting. Data collection took
place from April 2019 to June 2019. To ensure the anonymity of participants, all data were
traceable only under special codes, based on acronyms composed of letters and numbers
that were generated by a computer random number generator.
The inclusion criteria were as follows:

•
•
•

Voluntary participation in the study
Czech or Slovak nationality
Full-time students aged 18–30 years
The exclusion criteria were the following:

•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Psychiatric diagnosis, neurologic disease (e.g., epilepsy, cerebral palsy) or any known
contraindication of VAT, such as muscle hypotonia, angina pectoris, psychotic or acute
post-traumatic conditions and bleeding [16]
Post-traumatic stress disorder or perceived pain
Sleep deprivation
Substance abuse (caffeine, nicotine) on the day of the experiment or, in the case of
strong addictive substances (alcohol), one day before the experiment
Vigorous physical activity one day before experiment
Menstruation
Consumption of food two hours before the experiment
Medication or dietary supplements affecting the autonomous nervous system
(Self-reported) cardiovascular or metabolic conditions.

2.1. The Description of the Research Experiment
We used two different VAT devices that have been developed in the Czech Republic in recent years: the Rehabilitation vibration bed VIBROBED® and Vibrating lounger
VIBRATICS I. VIBROBED® (Figure 1) is a rehabilitation vibration bed, constructed by
Czech designers Zdeněk Vilímek and Petr Švarc in 2016. One of the unique features of the
Vibrobed is close interaction between the low-frequency sound and the music listened to by
the client; these are synchronously mixed to form a complete unified audio composition and
transmitted to four zones of the body schema (calves, thighs, upper back area, and low back
area). The Vibrobed has its own four-channel amplifier, music player and low-frequency
sound generator with various sinusoidal signal settings that can be selected according to
clients’ individual needs.
An amplifier of 4 × 100 W/2 Ohm with a built-in module composed of audio player
and generator was used; the modulation and modulated signal are sinewave. The output of
the amplifiers leads to vibrating exciters (electrodynamic transducers) and to headphones
(without a modulated signal of generator). Several potentiometers are used for independent
control of vibration levels in each zone and a rotary encoder to control functions of the
generator/player. Nominal impedance of one electrodynamic transducer is 4 Ω and
power capacity is 50 W RMS. Four body zones (Z1 = calf area 2×, Z2 = thigh area 2×,
Z3 = cross area 2×, Z4 = upper back area 2×) are excited by four pairs of transducers (one
zone contains a pair of closely placed transducers connected in parallel, with total nominal
impedance of 2 Ω per zone) fixed to a resonant membrane (special wood composite). A total
of 8 vibration exciters are placed under the body scheme. Their exact location, composition
of the resonant membrane, acoustic and software modifications, etc. are the subject of the
author’s solution.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

area 2×, Z3 =Across
Z4 = upper
backare
area
2×) are
excited
fourscheme.
pairs of transducers
composite).
totalarea
of 82×,
vibration
exciters
placed
under
theby
body
Their exact
(one zone
contains a of
pair
closely membrane,
placed transducers
in modifications,
parallel, with total
location,
composition
theofresonant
acoustic connected
and software
etc.
nominal
impedance
of 2 Ω solution.
per zone) fixed to a resonant membrane (special wood
are
the subject
of the author’s
composite).
A total ofVibrobed
8 vibrationtechnology
exciters areuses
placed
under the
body scheme.
Their
The innovative
primary
sequential
dosing
of exact
LFV
location,
composition
of
the
resonant
membrane,
acoustic
and
software
modifications,
etc.
(amplitude modulation with different time courses, sine sweep up and down in the
4 of 18
are the subject
of the
author’s
frequency
range
30–80
Hz) solution.
and various modulations of low-frequency waves in
The innovative
Vibrobed
technology
combination
with sound
and music
stimuli. uses primary sequential dosing of LFV
(amplitude modulation with different time courses, sine sweep up and down in the
frequency range 30–80 Hz) and various modulations of low-frequency waves in
combination with sound and music stimuli.

Figure1.1.Rehabilitation
Rehabilitationvibration
vibrationbed
bedVIBROBED
VIBROBED®® (from
(fromthe
theauthors’
authors’archive).
archive).
Figure

The
innovative
technology
primary
sequential
dosing
of LFVhygienic
(ampliVIBRATICS
I isVibrobed
a vibrating
bed withuses
wooden
board
and with
a softened
® (from the authors’ archive).
Figure
1.(Figure
Rehabilitation
vibration bed
VIBROBED
tude
modulation
with
different
time
sine is
sweep
up andby
down
the frequency
surface
2).
Transmission
ofcourses,
vibrations
generated
the in
quiet
subwoofer

range
30–80LFE,
Hz) which
and various
modulations
of low-frequency
waves
Buttkicker
has extremely
low bass
frequencies from
5 to in
200combination
Hz, throughwith
a set
VIBRATICS
Iattached
is a vibrating
with wooden
board and
a softened
hygienic
sound
andthat
music
of rods
arestimuli.
to thebed
bottom
of the lounger.
Thewith
frequency
modulated
surface
(Figure
2).
of the
vibrations
is generated
by
the generator.
quiet
subwoofer
VIBRATICS
is a Transmission
vibrating
bed by
with
wooden
board
and with
a softened
hygienic
surcontinuous
sine Isignal
is provided
Rohde and
Schwarz
function
Power
Buttkicker
LFE,
which
has
extremely
low
bass
frequencies
from
5
to
200
Hz,
through
set
face
(Figure
2).
Transmission
of
vibrations
is
generated
by
the
quiet
subwoofer
Buttkicker
Handling is 400 W, nominal impedance is 4 Ω. The frequency of the signal used inathe
of
rods
that
are
attached
to
the
bottom
of
the
lounger.
The
frequency
modulated
LFE,
which
has
extremely
low
bass
frequencies
from
5
to
200
Hz,
through
a
set
of
rods
experiment was 40 Hz.
that
are attached
the bottom
of theby
lounger.
Theand
frequency
modulated
continuousPower
sine
continuous
sine to
signal
is provided
the Rohde
Schwarz
function generator.
signal
is provided
Rohdeimpedance
and Schwarz
is 400
Handling
is 400 by
W,the
nominal
is function
4 Ω. Thegenerator.
frequencyPower
of theHandling
signal used
in W,
the
nominal
impedance
4 Ω. The frequency of the signal used in the experiment was 40 Hz.
experiment
was 40isHz.

Figure 2. Vibrating lounger VIBRATICS I (from the authors’ archive).

Figure2.2.Vibrating
Vibratinglounger
loungerVIBRATICS
VIBRATICS
I (from
the
authors’
archive).
Figure
I (from
the
authors’
archive).

The course of the experiment was the same in all cases, differing only in the type
of intervention provided. Each participant attended a total of three meetings, once a
week, always in the morning on the same day of the week, at the same time. Individual
meetings included:

•

•

•

20 min. stimulation with constant sinusoidal wave 40 Hz (carrier signal) LFV without
modulation (generated on VIBRATICS I), accompanied by nature sounds (recording
of river sounds in forest), in supine position (experimental intervention 1).
20 min. stimulation with specific modulation of LFV (40 Hz) (generated on Vibrobed)
accompanied by nature sounds of river in forest, in supine position (experimental
intervention 2). The detailed description of the amplitudes is below and in Appendix C
(Figure A1 and Table A1).
20 min. without any LFV, supine position (control intervention), accompanied by
nature sounds (recording of river sounds in forest). Measured on both types of

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

5 of 18

vibroacoustic beds (half of the participants measured on Vibrobed, the other half
measured on VIBRATICS I).
Constant (carrier signal) LFV is a traditionally used type of low-frequency stimulation,
while amplitude modulation of LFV, with different durations, has not yet been sufficiently
studied. In the case of both types of LFV, the same frequency of 40 Hz, comparable strength
of low-frequency waves and the same type of recording of natural sounds (river sounds in
forest) were used. Concerning the amplitude modulation, three types of amplitude modulation (AM) 40 Hz signal with different cycle lengths and then 5 min pure unmodulated
40 Hz signal (carrier signal), provided a total length of stimulation of 20 min. The contrasting effect of the sequentially dosed series was then considered and involved gradually
shortening the cycle length (14 s, 10 s, 6 s = from long to short) to the original shape of the
40 Hz carrier signal. Each AM cycle was supplemented by silence at the same length as the
length of one modulation signal cycle (stimulus processing time and organism response):

•
•
•
•

Sequence 1: alternating AM 1 (14 s) + silence (14 s), length 5 min.
Sequence 2: alternating AM 1 (10 s) + silence (10 s), length 5 min.
Sequence 3: alternating AM 1 (6 s) + silence (6 s), length 5 min.
Sequence 4: pure unmodulated signal 40 Hz (Carrier Signal or Carrier Wave), length
5 min.

It is visualized in Appendix C. The modulation index (or modulation depth) of amplitudes
was 70–75%.
Non-commercial recordings of nature sounds (sounds of river) from recording Studio
Reset (Brno, Czech Republic) were used. Participants listened to the natural sound with
earphones, and loudness was set up according to participants’ preferences. Participants did
not rate their preference or experience of nature sounds. The control intervention took place
in a supine position under similar conditions. The order of the three interventions was
randomized using a randomization table generated before starting the whole experiment
with a random number generator (the randperm function available in MATLAB R2018b,
MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). This was a single-blind study; the participants did not
know their order of intervention while, for logistical reasons, the researchers knew the
order of intervention.
2.2. Outcome Measures
Outcome measures included frequency indices of heart rate variability, Visual analogue
scales (VASs) for stress, UWIST Mood Adjective Check List, Perceived Stress Scale-10 (Czech
version) and a questionnaire for personal and demographic data.
In this study, HRV frequency indices were used as the primary physiological outcome.
HRV analysis provides a non-invasive method for evaluating cardiac autonomic regulation [25]. To calculate HRV frequency indices, the electrocardiogram was recorded using a
Polar V800 heart rate monitor (Polar, Kempele, Finland), which has been proved to be a
valid device [26]. RR intervals, which were defined as the duration between two adjacent
heartbeats, or, more precisely, as the duration between R waves on the electrocardiogram,
were measured with a resolution of 1 ms. HRV was analyzed before and after the interventions by means of orthoclinostatic maneuver (Figure 3). The orthoclinostatic maneuver
lasted 12 min and consisted of 5 min standing and 7 min in a supine position (with a 1 min
stabilization period) [27]. HRV was also continuously analyzed during the intervention
lasting 20 min [28]. The RR intervals were visually examined by an expert, and all artifacts
were manually filtered. From the orthoclinostatic maneuver, two 5-min segments (standing,
supine) were extracted. From the recording taken during the intervention, four adjacent
5 min segments were extracted. HRV frequency indices were calculated using a special
application DiANS PF8 (DIMEA Group, Olomouc, Czech Republic) from measured RR
intervals. The calculations were based on spectral analysis performed using Fast Fourier
Transform with a sliding 256 points Hanning window. The power spectra were quantified
by integrating the area under the power spectral density curve. Two frequency bands
were used: low frequency (LF) from 0.05 to 0.15 Hz, and high frequency (HF) from 0.15 to

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

taken during the intervention, four adjacent 5 min segments were extracted. HRV
frequency indices were calculated using a special application DiANS PF8 (DIMEA Group,
Olomouc, Czech Republic) from measured RR intervals. The calculations were based on
spectral analysis performed using Fast Fourier Transform with a sliding 256 points
Hanning window. The power spectra were quantified by integrating the area under
the
6 of
18
power spectral density curve. Two frequency bands were used: low frequency (LF) from
0.05 to 0.15 Hz, and high frequency (HF) from 0.15 to 0.50 Hz. The HF power was solely
modulated
cardiac
activity,
while the
power
wasactivity,
associated
with
0.50 Hz. Theby
HF
powervagal
was solely
modulated
byLF
cardiac
vagal
while
thebaroreflex
LF power
and
sympathetic
activity
on
the
sinus
node,
and
the
LF/HF
ratio
reflected
sympathovagal
was associated with baroreflex and sympathetic activity on the sinus node, and the LF/HF
balance
[21]. The
respiration activity
not
monitored.
ratio reflected
sympathovagal
balancewas
[21].
The
respiration activity was not monitored.

Figure
3. Procedure
Figure 3.
Procedure of
of the
the research
research experiment
experiment with
with outcome
outcome measures
measures used
used (VAS-S
(VAS-S and
and UWISTUWISTMACL were included in the questionnaire before/after the intervention).
MACL were included in the questionnaire before/after the intervention).

Visual analogue scale (VAS) for stress [29] involves a standardized blank line, 10 cm
long, anchored by the extreme values of 0 and 10. On the scale, participants recorded the
degree of acute stress experienced (0 = no stress, 10 = maximum stress) before and after
the intervention.
The UWIST (University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology) Mood Adjective
Checklist (UWIST-MACL) is a 24-item adjective checklist assessing the moods or feelings
that people have. The participants could score their mood on a 1–4 scale, ranging from
Definitely (1) to Definitely not (4) [30]. Score 1 means the participant is definitely feeling
the mood in the moment, e.g., happy, energetic or nervous. We included this questionnaire
as an additional measure, because it had been used in Wigram’s work on vibroacoustic
therapy [16] and it would help us to determine the effect of VAT on the participants’
subjective perceptions. It was applied as a pre-test post-test measurement.
The Perceived Stress Scale-10 [31], the Czech version [32], is a standardized selfassessment scale for measuring acute perceived stress. PSS-10 was measured before the first,
and after the third, intervention to determine whether the stress level changed significantly
during the research experiment due to external influences or not. This questionnaire
consists of 10 items related to the subjective evaluation of stressful situations during the

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

7 of 18

last month. Participants answered by choosing from the following options: never, almost
never, sometimes, quite often and very often, and were assigned points 0-4. The results
were evaluated using the arithmetic mean of all items. All recruited participants were
included into the study, notwithstanding the initial level of stress measured by PSS-10 and
VAS-stress.
2.3. Statistical Analysis
All data were imported into Excel 365 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA) tables for
descriptive statistical processing. Data were presented as arithmetic mean and standard
deviation. Frequency indices (LF, HF, LF/HF) were transformed using the natural logarithm
(Ln) to achieve a normal distribution. The normality of the transformed data was verified
using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for repeated measures,
with two factors (intervention factor and time factor) and interaction, was used to analyse
the heart rate and frequency indices. The intervention factor has the following three levels:
constant amplitude (Con), amplitude modulation (Seq), and placebo intervention (Pla).
The time factor has two levels for orthoclinostatic maneuver (Pre and Post intervention) or
four levels for the analysis of the intervention record (1–5 min, 6–10 min, 11–15 min, and
16–20 min). To increase statistical power, the four values obtained during the intervention
were pooled and evaluated using the planned contrast [33].
All remaining variables (perceived stress, and UWIST items) were compared using
the paired Wilcoxon test. A nonparametric test was preferred because some statistical
variables differed significantly from the normal distribution. No adjustment was used
in this study to control for Type 1 statistical error. For all statistical tests, p < 0.05 was
considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed using MATLAB
with Statistics Toolbox R2020a (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA).
3. Results
Out of the total number of 24 participants, two participants did not complete all
measurements because of illness (data from these two participants were not included in
the data analysis). The group consisted of 12 men (55%) and 10 women (45%). Participants
were aged 27.3 ± 11.9 years (mean ± standard deviation). None of the participants was in
treatment due to a psychiatric or neurological illness, and none of the participants had a
disability or a severe acute illness. Regular and sufficient sleep at the time of the experiment
was reported by 20 participants (91%). The average length of sleep before the research
experiment was 7.01 (range 4–8.5) hours. The presence of menstruation and the menstrual
cycle was also recorded for female participants, with 5 women (50%) reporting a follicular
phase and 5 women (50%) reporting a luteal phase. The sums of the participants’ total
scores, regarding perceived stress (evaluated by PSS-10), were 20.9 ± 2.0 at the beginning
of the research experiment and 20.1 ± 1.9 at the end of the experiment. Thus, there was
no statistically significant change (p = 0.084) in the participants’ stress load during the
experiment; in this case, we would evaluate the stress level as a medium load.
3.1. The Effect of Low-Frequency Sound on the Heart Rate Variability in Pre Test/Post Test
Measures
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test showed that the indices HRStanding (p = 0.037), HRSupine
(p = 0.004), Ln HFStanding (p = 0.006), and Ln LF/HFSupine (p = 0.021) differed significantly
from the normal distribution. The remaining indices did not differ significantly (all p ≥ 0.10)
from the normal distribution. After visual inspection of the histograms, the deviations from
normality were found to be small and ANOVA was considered robust enough for such
deviations from normality [26]. For this reason, ANOVA could be used, despite it requiring
the assumption of data normality. The results of the ANOVA are shown in Table 1 and
further explored in Figure 4.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

8 of 18

Table 1. Influence of low-frequency sound on heart rate variability indices in pre/post-test measures.
Variable

HRStanding
(beats/min)
HRSupine (beats/min)
Ln LFStanding (ms2 )
Ln LFSupine (ms2 )
Ln HFStanding (ms2 )
Ln HFSupine (ms2 )
Ln LF/HFStanding
Ln LF/HFSupine

Time

Intervention

Interaction

p

p

p

0.010

0.21

0.76

<0.001
<0.001
0.072
<0.001
0.019
<0.001
0.57

0.054
0.11
0.63
0.12
0.88
0.31
0.80

0.68
0.28
0.90
0.99
0.85
0.076
0.98

p—significance of ANOVA factors; HR—heart rate; Standing—standing body position in orthoclinostatic maneuver; Supine—supine body position in orthoclinostatic maneuver; Ln—natural logarithm; LF—low-frequency
power; HF—high-frequency power; LF/HF = LF/HF ratio.

ANOVA revealed a statistically significant time factor (all p ≤ 0.019) for HRStanding ,
HRSupine , Ln LFStanding , Ln HFStanding , Ln HFSupine , and Ln LF/HF Standing , suggesting that
interventions affected HRV indices in the post-test compared to the pre-test. However, no
statistically significant intervention factor (all p ≥ 0.054) or interaction (all p ≥ 0.076) was
found for any HRV index. Therefore, it was not possible to find a difference in the effect
after the studied interventions in this study.
3.2. The Effect of Low-Frequency Sound on Hear Rate Variability during Intervention
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test showed that the indices Ln LFInt (p = 0.24), Ln HFInt
(p = 0.38) and Ln LF/HFInt (p = 0.13) did not differ significantly from the normal distribution. HRInt differed significantly (p < 0.001) from the normal distribution, but after visual
inspection of the histogram, deviations from normality were found to be small. ANOVA
was considered robust enough for such deviations from normality [26]. For this reason,
ANOVA could be used, despite it requiring the assumption of data normality. The results
of the ANOVA are shown in Table 2 and Figure 5.
The interaction was not significant for any index (all p ≥ 0.76). The time factor was
only significant for Ln LFInt (p = 0.041). The intervention factor was significant for HRInt
(p < 0.001) and Ln LF/HFInt (p = 0.011), so a more detailed analysis was performed using
ANOVA contrast. The Seq intervention significantly (p < 0.001) increased HRInt compared
to placebo (Seq: 67.4 ± 11.4 beats/min, Pla: 64.4 ± 10.1 beats/min). The Con intervention
significantly (p = 0.004) increased HRInt compared to placebo (Con: 66.5 ± 11.0 beats/min,
Pla: 64.4 ± 10.1 beats/min). The difference between the Seq and Con interventions was not
significant (p = 0.20). In addition, the Con intervention significantly (p = 0.003) increased
Ln LF/HFInt compared to the placebo group (Con: −0.0 ± 1.0, Pla: −0.3 ± 1.0). However,
the Seq intervention did not significantly (p = 0.097) change Ln LF/HFInt compared to the
placebo group (Seq: −0.2 ± 1.1, Pla: −0.3 ± 1.0). The difference between Seq and Con
interventions was not significant (p = 0.17).
Thus, it can be said that LFS has a stimulating effect, because it increased the HRInt
caused by transfer of the activity of cardiac autonomous regulation from the vagus side to
the sympathetic side.
3.3. The Effect of Low-Frequency Sound on the Subjective Perception of Stress and Mood
Subjective perception of acute stress pre- and post-intervention was measured by
VAS-stress. Comparing the values obtained from individual interventions, it is possible to
infer a significant reduction in stress, which, however, occurred in all cases, including the
intervention with sounds of nature (all p < 0.001). However, the differences between the
values after the intervention were not statistically significant (all p ≥ 0.10) (Figure 6).

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024
Healthcare 2022, 10, x

9 of 18

9

Figure
Influence of low-frequency
sound
on (a,b);
heart rate
(a,b); low-frequency
power (c,d); h
Figure 4. Influence
of 4.low-frequency
sound on heart
rate
low-frequency
power (c,d);
frequency power (e,f); and low-frequency/high-frequency ratio (g,h) in pre/post measu
high-frequency power (e,f); and low-frequency/high-frequency ratio (g,h) in pre/post measures.
Standing—standing body position in the orthoclinostatic maneuver; Supine—supine body pos
Standing—standing
body
position in themaneuver;
orthoclinostatic
maneuver;
Supine—supine
body
position
in the
orthoclinostatic
Ln—natural
logarithm;
Sup—placebo
supine;
Seq—stimula
in the orthoclinostatic
maneuver;modulation
Ln—natural
Sup—placebo
supine;
Seq—stimulation
with amplitude
of logarithm;
LFV; Con—constant
LFV. The
values
displayed above the clip
with amplitude modulation
of LFV; LSD
Con—constant
LFV. The values displayed above the clips are
p-values of Fisher’s
tests.
p-values of Fisher’s LSD tests.

3.2. The Effect of Low-Frequency Sound on Hear Rate Variability during Intervention
Considering theThe
effect
of VAT on mood change,
therethat
were
only
twoLn
items
the Ln HF
(p = 0.24),
Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test showed
the
indices
LFIntfrom
UWIST questionnaire
with
significant
differences
(Figure
7).
In
the
Slowed
down
item,
= 0.38) and Ln LF/HFInt (p = 0.13) did not differ significantly from the normal distribut
there was a significant
increase
between the
amplitude
and sounds
of nature
HRInt differed
significantly
(p sequence
< 0.001) from
the normal
distribution,
but after vi
values (p = 0.031),
while
in
the
Active
item
there
was
a
statistically
significant
decrease
in
inspection of the histogram, deviations from normality were found to be small.
ANO
constant amplitude
values
compared
to
the
sounds
of
nature
(p
=
0.008).
No
significant
was considered robust enough for such deviations from normality [26]. For this rea
changes were found for the other items (all p > 0.05).

Ln LF/HFInt compared to the placebo group (Con: −0.0 ± 1.0, Pla: −0.3 ± 1.0). However,
Seq intervention did not significantly (p = 0.097) change Ln LF/HFInt compared to
placebo group (Seq: −0.2 ± 1.1, Pla: −0.3 ± 1.0). The diﬀerence between Seq and
interventions was not significant (p = 0.17).
Thus, it can be said that LFS has a stimulating effect, because it increased
the H
10 of 18
caused by transfer of the activity of cardiac autonomous regulation from the vagus s
to the sympathetic side.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

Table 2. InfluenceTable
of low-frequency
on heart rate
variability
during indices
intervention.
2. Influence ofsound
low-frequency
sound
on heart indices
rate variability
during intervention
Variable

Time
Variable

HRInt (beats/min)
Ln LFInt (ms2 )
Ln HFInt (ms2 )
Ln LF/HFInt

HRInt (beats/min)
0.42
Ln LFInt
(ms2)
0.041
Ln HFInt0.35
(ms2)
0.20
Ln LF/HFInt

p

Intervention
Time

Interaction
Intervention

p
0.42
<0.001
0.19 0.041
0.23 0.35
0.011 0.20

pp
<0.001
>0.99
0.19
0.84
>0.99
0.23
0.76
0.011

p

Interactio
p
>0.99
0.84
>0.99
0.76

p—significance of ANOVA
factors; HR—heart
rate;
Int—intervention;
logarithm; LF—low-frequency
p—significance
of ANOVA
factors;
HR—heartLn—natural
rate; Int—intervention;
Ln—natural logarithm; L
power; HF—high-frequency
power;
LF/HF
=
LF/HF
ratio.
low-frequency power; HF—high-frequency power; LF/HF = LF/HF ratio.

Healthcare 2022, 10, x

11 of 19

modulation of LFV; Con—constant LFV. The values displayed above the clips are p-values of
ANOVA contrasts.

3.3. The Effect of Low-Frequency Sound on the Subjective Perception of Stress and Mood

Subjective perception of acute stress pre- and post-intervention was measured by
Figure
5. Influence
of low-frequency
sound
on heartinterventions,
rate
(a); (b);
low-frequency
power (b); h
VAS-stress.
Comparing
the values
obtained
from
it is possible
Figure 5. Influence
of low-frequency
sound
on heart rate
(a);individual
low-frequency
power
high-frequency
frequency
power
(c);
and
low-frequency/high-frequency
ratio
(d)
during
intervention
lasting 4
to infer
significant
reduction in stress,ratio
which,
however,
occurred
in all4 cases,
including
power
(c); a
and
low-frequency/high-frequency
(d) during
intervention
lasting
× 5 min
(Int1 to
min (Int1 to Int4). Ln—natural logarithm; Sup—placebo supine; Seq—stimulation with amplit
the intervention
with sounds
of nature
(all pSeq—stimulation
< 0.001). However,
differences
between
Int4).
Ln—natural logarithm;
Sup—placebo
supine;
with the
amplitude
modulation
of
the Con—constant
values after the
intervention
were notabove
statistically
(all
≥ 0.10) contrasts.
(Figure 6).
LFV;
LFV.
The values displayed
the clipssignificant
are p-values
of pANOVA

Figure 6. Influence of low-frequency sound on stress assessed by means of visual analogue scale in
Figure 6. Influence of low-frequency sound on stress assessed by means of visual analogue scale in
pre/post measures. Sup—placebo supine; Seq—sequentially dosed amplitude; Con—continuous
pre/post measures. Sup—placebo supine; Seq—sequentially dosed amplitude; Con—continuous
amplitude. The values displayed above the clips are p-values of Fisher’s LSD tests.
amplitude. The values displayed above the clips are p-values of Fisher’s LSD tests.

Considering the effect of VAT on mood change, there were only two items from the
UWIST questionnaire with significant differences (Figure 7). In the Slowed down item,
there was a significant increase between the sequence amplitude and sounds of nature
values (p = 0.031), while in the Active item there was a statistically significant decrease in
constant amplitude values compared to the sounds of nature (p = 0.008). No significant
changes were found for the other items (all p > 0.05).

Considering the effect of VAT on mood change, there were only two items from
UWIST questionnaire with significant differences (Figure 7). In the Slowed down i
there was a significant increase between the sequence amplitude and sounds of na
values (p = 0.031), while in the Active item there was a statistically significant
decreas
11 of 18
constant amplitude values compared to the sounds of nature (p = 0.008). No signifi
changes were found for the other items (all p > 0.05).

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

Figure 7. Influence of low-frequency sound on two items of UWIST – Sluggish (a) and Active (
Figure 7. Influence of low-frequency sound on two items of UWIST – Sluggish (a) and Active (b) in
pre/post measures. Sup—placebo supine; Seq—stimulation with amplitude modulation of
pre/post measures.
supine;
Seq—stimulation
withthe
amplitude
LFV; Con
ConSup—placebo
–constant LFV.
The values
displayed above
clips aremodulation
p-values of of
Fisher’s
LSD tests.
–constant LFV. The values displayed above the clips are p-values of Fisher’s LSD tests.

4. Discussion

4. Discussion

After all types of interventions, significant differences were measured in HRV (
After all types of interventions, significant differences were measured in HRV (time
factor) and there was a slight reduction in subjective stress perception (measured u
factor) and there was a slight reduction in subjective stress perception (measured using
VAS). However, when comparing the interventions, there was only minimal differ
VAS). However, when comparing the interventions, there was only minimal difference
between the effect of constant LFV/amplitude modulation of LFV and sounds of nat
between the effect of constant LFV/amplitude modulation of LFV and sounds of nature,
so this effect must be attributed mostly to factors other than LFV. It is possible that i
so this effect must be attributed mostly to factors other than LFV. It is possible that in all
cases the recording with sounds of nature had an effect, but it could also be the fact that the
participants lay still during all three conditions. In this case, we would need to find out if
there would be a difference between a group that listened to sounds of nature when lying
down and a group that did not listen to sounds of nature whilst lying down.
These results differ from most previously published findings on the effect of VAT on
physiological functions [11–15,19–21]. However, in almost all previous studies, LFV stimulation has been used in combination with music. Veternik et al. [34], however, applied only
LFV to investigate its impact on the autonomic nervous system function and concluded that
LFV did not have an effect. We could assume that physiological functions are influenced
more by music than LFS.
Another finding of this study is the effect of constant LFV on the sympathetic nervous system during the intervention itself (this effect could not be detected during the
orthoclinostatic maneuver). This finding could be explained by empirical evidence of VAT
practitioners, who have noticed that longer stimulation by constant LFV may provoke
physiological irritation and worsen subjective feeling [10,16]. Similarly, we can explain why
constant LFV had a significant effect on mood decrease in the item Activity (one of the items
of UWIST-MACL), compared to nature sounds, and LFV amplitude modulation had a significant effect on the increase in the Slowed down item (again an item in UWIST-MACL). In
this way, participants reflected stimulation of their sympathetic nervous system by feeling
more active (as a result of constant LFV stimulation), whereas increase of parasympathetic
activity was connected to feeling slowed down and probably more relaxed (as a result of
amplitude modulation of LFV). Thus, we found differences between constant LFV and
amplitude modulation of LFV. However, this study did not confirm the assumptions of
significantly greater amplitude modulation of LFV efficiency on the autonomic nervous
system. In particular, the expected significant effect on the parasympathetic nervous system
was not observed.
Results of this study may be important for VAT practitioners and music therapists. It
confirms (at least partially) the initial assumption that the effectiveness of VAT is increased
by a combination of two effective stimuli, namely music and LFV [4]. However, the
effectiveness of LFV (without music) on the autonomic nervous system and subjective
stress perception has not yet been clearly demonstrated. Music was found to be a very
strong stimulus for cardiac activity, and subjective perception and had a complex effect on

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

12 of 18

nerve centres [35]. Even when combined with LFV, music probably remained the primary
signal that determined ANS behaviour, whereas the application of LFV alone acted on
the ANS differently. This could explain the inconsistent impact of LFV on the autonomic
nervous system observed in studies that used LFV in combination with or without music.
Moreover, LFV without music also only had a small effect on emotions. We do not have (as
is the case with music [35]) culturally imprinted patterns for the perception of LFV, and,
therefore, the effect of LFV on mood is probably much more unpredictable.
Recommendations for future research:

•

•

•

•
•

To further investigate the effect of LFV on the autonomic nervous system, we recommend conducting an experimental study that would compare the effect of music versus LFV with music (or also only LFV without music) measured by HRV or
similar outcome measures, to find out if the effect of LFV is influenced by various
accompanying stimuli.
We recommend that the specific part of the autonomic nervous system also be considered in future studies, as it is possible that the vagal response to LFV stimulation
differs from the sympathetic response.
In this research experiment, the time span between the interventions was one week.
Due to the fact that no statistically significant differences were found in the VSF
values measured in the standing and lying positions after the intervention, the LFV
effect seems to persist only for a short time after the end of the stimulus and is
relatively quickly masked by environmental disturbances. Thus, the intervals between
interventions could be only one day in future research studies.
We recommend to only recruit students with high levels of stress in future studies
focused on the research of stress.
The use of VAT can be further explored in patients suffering from multiple diseases.

Strengths and Limits of the Study
Vibroacoustic research requires further studies to verify the effectiveness of LFV,
especially through physiological measurements. A small number of studies with HRV
have been realized so far. The differences between the effects of LFV without music and
with music have not been sufficiently explored, and, above all, research into various LFV
parameters, such as frequencies or amplitude modulations, is completely lacking. Although
this study did not prove the expected effect of LFV, it allows space for hypotheses that need
to be explored by other research studies (mainly in clinical areas) and that may be essential
to understand the effect of LFV administered with and without music.
We tried to adhere to relatively strict criteria for standardization of measurements and
a relatively homogeneous sample. Nevertheless, there were some pre-test differences in
participants, which could be caused by weekly delays between measurements or factors
that we did not detect, such as spontaneous physical activity. For similar studies in the
future, we propose to shorten the time between measurements; optimally, to perform
measurements in a sequence of consecutive days.
The blinding procedure also showed certain limits given by the inter-subject design of
the study. Blinding could only be effective in relation to the impossibility of identifying
amplitude modulations, not in relation to control measurements (listening to sounds of
nature). Constant LFV and LFV with amplitude modulation were generated on two different types of vibroacoustic beds, which do not have the same technical solutions. In future
studies it would be more appropriate to conduct research on only one vibroacoustic bed.
The relatively small number of participants was also problematic, but the course of
the study was interrupted by COVID-19 and, due to pandemic restrictions, it was not
possible to continue the research and obtain a larger data set. Furthermore, this study was
designed as a pilot study in preparation for a more robust RCT that is already registered at
ClinicalTrial.gov (NCT04293848). We decided to use Vibrobed for this RCT study because
we would like to research the effect of amplitude modulations and other LFV characteristics.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

13 of 18

In addition, the participants did not have a sufficiently high level of stress before the
experiment, and it is possible that the differences in interventions could not be sufficiently
manifested for this reason. In this study we did not only recruit students with high stress
levels, because we expected much stronger effects from the intervention. We realise this
could have had a negative impact on the data and we recommend recruiting only students
with higher levels of stress in future studies. Before the intervention, the participants
(due to HRV measurements) lay for 7 min, a time that could serve to ensure sufficient
relaxation of the participant before the intervention and to influence the data obtained
during successive measurements. Although research in clinical populations, such as those
with high stress levelsthat affect the activity of the autonomic nervous system, is more
demanding, it could yield more favourable results in verifying the effectiveness of VAT.
In addition, some of the measurement tools used were probably not sensitive enough to
capture the changes caused by the interventions, and in the case of HRV, its sensitivity to
several disturbing factors may also be problematic.
Last, but not least, the study protocol was not registered for this study (considering
its pilot character), although there was no significant deviation from the pre-established
experimental design during the study.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.V., J.K. (Jiří Kantor), M.B. (Michal Botek), J.K. (Jakub
Krejčí) and Z.J. (Zbyněk Janečka); methodology, J.K. (Jiří Kantor), Z.V., J.K. (Jakub Krejčí), Z.J. (Zbyněk
Janečka) and M.B. (Michal Botek); validation, J.K. (Jakub Krejčí) and J.K. (Jiří Kantor); formal analysis,
J.K. (Jakub Krejčí) and J.K. (Jiří Kantor); investigation, Z.J. (Zuzana Jedličková)., A.N. and M.B.
(Monika Bucharová); resources, J.K. (Jiří Kantor).; data curation, J.K. (Jakub Krejčí); writing—original
draft preparation, J.K. (Jiří Kantor); writing—review and editing, J.K. (Jakub Krejčí); E.A.C., Z.V.,
Z.J. (Zbyněk Janečka), M.B. (Michal Botek); visualization, J.K. (Jakub Krejčí); supervision, Z.V.,
Z.J. (Zbyněk Janečka), M.B. (Michal Botek) and E.A.C.; project administration, J.K. (Jiří Kantor);
funding acquisition, J.K. (Jiří Kantor). All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Faculty of Education, Palacký University Olomouc, project
number: IGA_PdF_2022_021, project title: The Effectiveness of Vibroacoustic Therapy in Educational
Environment with Focus on Special Needs. The APC was funded by the same source.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The Institutional Review Board Statement was obtained
from Ethical board, Faculty of Education, Palacký University in Olomouc (No. 5/2019).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: Many thanks to Viktor Svoboda who helped us a lot with the description of
technical parameters of Vibrobed and LFV.
Conflicts of Interest: Z.V. is an co-developer of VIBROBED and Zbyněk Janečka is the co-author of
VIBRATICS I. For this reason, they were not involved in the measurement procedures, curation and
analysis of data. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

14 of 18

Appendix A. Informed Consent
INFORMED CONSENT
For research project: VAS (project IGA)
Implementation period: 4-2019/2-2020
project leader: doc. Mgr. Jiří Kantor, Ph.D.

Madam, sir,
We are writing to you to ask you to collaborate on a research project involving an experiment
involving listening to sounds and taking measurements before, during and after the experiment
using the methods listed below. All procedures used during the experiment and measurements
are non-invasive and safe, except for the risks listed below. Only nature sounds and low
frequency sounds will be used in the experiment.

The purpose of the study is to investigate the effect of the sounds used in the experiment on the
human body.
Measurement methods:
The composition of data collection methods includes non-invasive instrumental and
psychological test instruments:

•

•
•
•
•
•

•

An initial questionnaire to obtain personal and demographic data, such as age, gender,
incidence of health problems, etc. and other specific questions related to current
psychosomatic status.
Analysis of heart rate variability using frequency and time indices.
Blood pressure and respiratory rate measurements.
Visual analogue scales to detect differences in subjective perception of stress levels.
UWIST Mood Adjective Checklist to determine the difference in emotional tuning before
and after the intervention.
The standardised Perceived Stress Scale questionnaire (Cohen, 1983) in the Czech version
called the “Škály vnímaného stresu”, as presented by Buršíková Brabcová and
Kohout (2018).
Interview to supplement data of a rather qualitative nature.

Time Schedule:
The total length of one session is 60 min and will take place once a week, always on the same day
and time. There will be a total of three sessions, so the length of participation in the research is
three weeks. The measurements will take place at two university departments, PdF and FTK. The
results of the research will be shared after the study is completed.
The following risks are known for the intervention implemented in the research experiment:

•
•
•
•
•

Hypotonia
Angina pectoris
Psychotic states
Post-traumatic conditions
Open bleeding

The participant of the study acknowledges by his/her signature (below) that he/she does not
suffer from any of the above mentioned risks at the time of the experiment.
The participant of the study agrees:

•

•

To avoid intake of addictive substances in the morning hours before the experiment (drinks
containing caffeine and tannin, cigarettes) and strong addictive substances the day before the
experiment (alcohol, marijuana).
With taking heart rate recordings, blood pressure measurements and audio recording of the
qualitative interview.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

15 of 18

•
•

With anonymous direct quotation of the data from the interview.
With the retention of all research records, which will be used anonymously only for the
purposes of the research study.

Statement
I declare that I agree to participate in the project mentioned above. I have been informed by the
project leader about the nature of the research and have been informed about the objectives and
the methods and procedures that will be used in the research, as well as the benefits and risks for
me of participating in the project. I agree that all data collected will be used for research purposes
only and that the results of the research may be published anonymously.
I have had the opportunity to consider everything properly, calmly and in sufficient time. I have
had the opportunity to ask the researcher everything I considered essential and necessary to know.
I received a clear and understandable answer to these questions. I am informed that I have the
possibility to withdraw from the project at any time, even without giving a reason.
The researcher declares that personal information that could identify the research participant will
not be passed on to anyone or appear in any publication outputs. Personal data will be protected
in accordance with applicable legislation.
This informed consent is made in two copies, each with the validity of an original, one of which
will be given to me (or my legal representative) and the other to the project investigator.
Name, surname and signature of the project leader:
____________________________________________________________
In______________________ on:_________________________________

Name, surname and signature of the participant in the project:
____________________________________________________________
In______________________ on:_________________________________

Appendix B. Protocol for the Collection of Demographic/Personal Data
ENTRY PROTOCOL—VAS 2019
Research participant code:
Group number/Participant code/Meeting number: . . . . . . . . . . . . / . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . /
... ... ... ... .
This anonymous data is only filled in before the research begins. Thank you for your time and
willingness to complete the survey.
1. Gender
a. Male
b. Female
2. Age..............
3. I have a somatic/other medical disability or long-term/acute illness that is usually
considered more serious:
a. no
b. yes
If yes, please specify which ones:
.......................................................................................................................................................
4. Regular medication?
a. no
b. yes

6. Sleep quality—regular and sufficient sleep (at least 6-7 h)?
a. yes
b. no 2022, 10, 1024
Healthcare

16 of 18

7. I am not currently receiving psychiatric treatment.
If yes, please state what medication you are taking and for what:
.......................................................................................................................................................
a. yes
5. Menstrual cycle (women only)—follicular (1–14 days) and luteal (14–28 days) phases.
Please indicate the start of your menstrual cycle:...........................or what phase of your cycle you
b. no
are in:.............................
6. Sleep quality—regular and sufficient sleep (at least 6–7 h)?
a. treatment,
yes
If you are receiving psychiatric
please indicate the diagnosis or reason for treatment (voluntary):
b. no
7. I am not currently receiving psychiatric treatment.
.......................................................................................................................................................
a. yes
If there is a mental disorder thatb.could
affect the research measurements, consultation with the supervision team is required.
no
If you are receiving psychiatric treatment, please indicate the diagnosis or reason for treatment
(voluntary):
.......................................................................................................................................................
Date:
If there is a mental disorder that could affect the research measurements, consultation with the supervision
team is required.
Signature of the researcher:
Date:
Signature of the researcher:

Appendix C. Visualisation of Amplitude Modulation Used by Vibrobed
Appendix C. Visualisation of Amplitude Modulation Used by Vibrobed

Figure
FigureA1.
A1.Visualisation
Visualisationof
ofAmplitude
AmplitudeModulation
Modulationused
usedby
byVibrobed.
Vibrobed.
Table A1. Parameters of audio-recording for Vibrobed.
AM 1 (14 s)

AM 2 (10 s)

AM 3 (6 s)

Calibration 40 Hz

Zone
(Vibrobed)

dBmax

Pmax (W)

dBmax

Pmax (W)

dBmax

Pmax (W)

−15 dB
RMS

W

Z1

−9.15

0.89

−9

0.92

−10.1

0.71

0.68

0.23

Z2

−9.15

0.86

−9

0.89

−10.1

0.69

0.67

0.22

Z3

−9.15

1.02

−9

1.06

−10.1

0.82

0.73

0.27

Z4

−9.15

1.02

−9

1.06

−10.1

0.82

0.73

0.27

Z1—calves area; Z2—thighs area; Z3—low back area; Z4—upper back area; Pmax (W)—Nominal Power (Watt);
dBmax—Maximum decibel level; RMS (Root mean squer)—Average transducers power.

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

17 of 18

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

Punkanen, M.; Ala-Ruona, E. Contemporary Vibroacoustic Therapy: Perspectives on Clinical Practice, Research, and Training.
Music Med. 2012, 4, 128–135. [CrossRef]
Kantor, J.; Campbell, E.A.; Kantorová, L.; Marečková, J.; Regec, V.; Karasová, K.; Sedláčková, D.; Klugar, M. Exploring vibroacoustic therapy in adults experiencing pain: A scoping review. BMJ Open 2022, 12, e046591. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Campbell, E.; Hynynen, J.; Burger, B.; Ala-Ruona, E. Exploring the use of Vibroacoustic treatment for managing chronic pain and
comorbid mood disorders: A mixed methods study. Nord. J. Music Ther. 2019, 28, 291–314. [CrossRef]
Ahonen, H. Low frequency research—Client populations and common frequencies used—Literature review. Laurier Cent. Music
Ther. Res. Newsl. 2007, 4, 1–5.
Bartel, L.R.; Chen, R.E.W.; Alain, C.; Ross, B. Vibroacoustic Stimulation and Brain Oscillation: From Basic Research to Clinical
Application. Music Med. 2017, 9, 14. [CrossRef]
Campbell, E.A.; Hynynen, J.; Ala-Ruona, E. Vibroacoustic treatment for chronic pain and mood disorders in a specialized
healthcare setting. Music Med. 2017, 9, 187–197. [CrossRef]
Rüütel, E.; Vinkel, I.; Eelmäe, P. The effects of short-term vibroacoustic treatment on spasticity and perceived health conditions of
patients with spinal cord and brain injuries. Music Med. 2017, 9, 202–208. [CrossRef]
Campbell, E.; Burger, B.; Ala-Ruona, E. A Single-Case, Mixed Methods Study Exploring the Role of Music Listening in Vibroacoustic Treatment. Voices A World Forum Music Ther. 2019, 19, 27. [CrossRef]
Campbell, E.A.; Kantor, J.; Kantorová, L.; Svobodová, Z.; Wosch, T. Tactile Low Frequency Vibration in Dementia Management: A
Scoping Review Protocol. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 1904. [CrossRef]
Skille, O. VibroAcoustic Therapy. J. Music Ther. 1989, 8, 61–77. [CrossRef]
Campbell, E.A.; Hynynen, J.; Burger, B.; Vainionpää, A.; Ala-Ruona, E. Vibroacoustic treatment to improve functioning and ability
to work: A multidisciplinary approach to chronic pain rehabilitation. Disabil. Rehabil. 2019, 43, 2055–2070. [CrossRef]
Delmastro, F.; Martino, F.D.; Dolciotti, C. Physiological Impact of Vibro-Acoustic Therapy on Stress and Emotions through
Wearable Sensors. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications
Workshops, Athens, Greece, 19–23 March 2018; pp. 621–626. [CrossRef]
Cavallo, F.; Rovini, E.; Dolciotti, C.; Radi, L.; Della Ragione, R.; Bongioanni, P.; Fiorini, L. Physiological response to Vibro-Acoustic
stimulation in healthy subjects: A preliminary study. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC), Montreal, QC, Canada, 20–24 July 2020; pp. 5921–5924. [CrossRef]
Rüütel, E. The psychophysiological effects of music and vibroacoustic stimulation. Nord. J. Music Ther. 2002, 11, 16–26. [CrossRef]
Koike, Y.; Hoshitani, M.; Tabata, Y.; Seki, K.; Nishimura, R.; Kano, Y. Effects of Vibroacoustic Therapy on Elderly Nursing Home
Residents with Depression. J. Phys. Ther. Sci. 2012, 24, 291–294. [CrossRef]
Wigram, T. The Effects of Vibroacoustic Therapy on Clinical and Non-Clinical Populations. Ph.D. Thesis, London University,
London, UK, 1996.
Kantor, J.; Kantorová, L.; Marečková, J.; Peng, D.; Vilímek, Z. Potential of Vibroacoustic Therapy in Persons with Cerebral Palsy:
An Advanced Narrative Review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 3940. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Katusic, A.; Alimovic, S.; Mejaski-Bosnjak, V. The effect of vibration therapy on spasticity and motor function in children with
cerebral palsy: A randomized controlled trial. NeuroRehabilitation 2013, 32, 1–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Brodsky, W. Post-exposure effects of music-generated vibration and whole-body acoustic stimulation among symphony orchestra
musicians. Psychol. Music 2000, 28, 98–115. [CrossRef]
Vilímek, Z.; Kořínková, J.; Kantor, J. The Impact of Vibroacoustic Therapy on Subjective Perception of University Students—Mixed
Design Pilot Study. Univers. J. Educ. Res. 2021, 9, 1409–1420. [CrossRef]
Ahonen, H.; Deek, P.; Kroeker, J. Low Frequency Sound Treatment Promoting Physical and Emotional Relaxation Qualitative
Study. Int. J. Psychosoc. Rehabil. 2012, 17, 45–58.
Bartel, L.; Mosabbir, A. Possible Mechanisms for the Effects of Sound Vibration on Human Health. Healthcare 2021, 9, 597.
[CrossRef]
Beiter, R.; Nash, R.; McCrady, M.; Rhoades, D.; Linscomb, M.; Clarahan, M.; Sammut, S. The Prevalence and Correlates of
Depression, Anxiety, and Stress in a Sample of College Students. J. Affect. Disord. 2015, 173, 90–96. [CrossRef]
Charles, N.E.; Strong, S.J.; Burns, L.C.; Bullerjahn, M.R.; Serafine, K.M. Increased mood disorder symptoms, perceived stress, and
alcohol use among college students during the COVID-19 pandemic. Psychiatry Res. 2021, 296, 113706. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. Heart rate
variability: Standards of measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use. Eur. Heart J. 1996, 17, 354–381. [CrossRef]
Giles, D.; Draper, N.; Neil, W. Validity of the Polar V800 heart rate monitor to measure RR intervals at rest. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.
2016, 116, 563–571. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Botek, M.; Krejčí, J.; Neuls, F.; Novotný, J. Effect of modified method of autonomic nervous system activity assessment on results
of heart rate variability analysis. Acta Univ. Palacki. Olomuc. Gymn. 2013, 43, 39–46. [CrossRef]
Ernst, G. Heart Rate Variability; Springer: London, UK, 2014.
Lesage, F.X.; Berjot, S.; Deschamps, F. Clinical stress assessment using a visual analogue scale. Occup. Med. 2012, 62, 600–605.
[CrossRef]

Healthcare 2022, 10, 1024

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

18 of 18

Matthews, G.; Jones, D.M.; Chamberlain, A.G. Refining the measurement of mood: The UWIST Mood Adjective Check List. Br. J.
Psychol. 1990, 81, 17–42. [CrossRef]
Cohen, S.; Williamson, G. Perceived stress in a probability sample of the U.S. In The Social Psychology of Health: Claremont
Symposium on Applied Social Psychology; Spacapam, S., Oskamp, S., Eds.; Sage: Newbury Park, CA, USA, 1998; pp. 31–67.
Buršíková Brabcová, D.; Kohout, J. Psychometrické ověření české verze Škály vnímaného stresu. E-Psychologie 2018, 12, 37–52.
[CrossRef]
Ghasemi, A.; Zahediasl, S. Normality tests for statistical analysis: A guide for non-statisticians. Int. J. Endocrinol. Metab. 2012, 10,
486–489. [CrossRef]
Veternik, M.; Misek, J.; Jakus, J.; Tonhajzerova, I.; Jakusova, V.; Hudeckova, H. The impact of sound exposure on heart rate
variability in adolescent students. Physiol. Res. 2018, 67, 695–702. [CrossRef]
Taylor, D.B. Biomedical Foundations of Music as Therapy, 2nd ed.; ECPrinting: Bruxelles, Belgium, 2010.

