TOPICAL: The Impact of the Schumann Resonances on Human and
Mammalian Physiology
Ground-based Investigations to Support Human and Mammalian
Studies Beyond Low Earth Orbit
A White Paper Submitted to the NASA Biological and Physical Sciences
Decadal Survey

Authors:
Viktor Stolc, Ph.D., NASA Ames Research Center
Maurice Ohayon, M.D., D.Sc., Ph.D., Stanford University Medical School
Friedemann Freund, Ph.D., SETI Institute
David J. Loftus, M.D., Ph.D., NASA Ames Research Center

Date:
October 31, 2021

1

The Impact of the Schumann Resonances on Human and
Mammalian Physiology
Introduction
One of the most intriguing aspects of Earth’s electromagnetic radiation environment is a weak
electromagnetic field known as the Schumann Resonances. The Schumann Resonances form
standing waves in the spherical “cavity” between the surface of the Earth and the underside of
the Earth’s ionosphere, created and maintained by lightning strikes worldwide. Their frequency
spectrum in the extremely low frequency (ELF) range is determined by the dimensions of the
cavity formed between the Earth’s surface and the ionosphere (see Figure 1). Both the
amplitude and frequency of the Schumann resonances vary from day to day, even hourly, due
primarily to the effects of solar storms on Earth’s ionosphere, also known as geomagnetic
anomalies 1. Early attempts to explain the Schumann Resonances date back to the work by
Heaviside and Kennelly (1902). Their existence was proven by Appleton and Barnett (1925).
However, a complete explanation was only provided by Schumann in 1952-1954 2, followed by
extensive observational characterization by physicists at MIT using a large antenna and
sensitive battery-powered recording equipment 3.

Fig. 1. The Schumann Resonances are a weak electromagnetic standing wave and its harmonics
formed in the spherical cavity between the surface of the Earth and Earth’s ionosphere. Their
frequencies lie at 7.83 Hz (fundamental), 14.3, 20.8, 27.3 and 33.8 Hz. Their amplitudes fall into
the picoTesla range. There are no Schumann Resonances on the moon since the moon lies well
beyond the Earth’s ionosphere.

2

Electromagnetic Radiation Effects on Humans
Many studies have been published describing a broad range of physiological, psychological, and
behavioral changes associated with changes or disturbances in the geomagnetic activity (e.g. by
solar storm activity) or non-natural sources 4–7. In a recent effort to investigate this
phenomenon, scientists measured heart rate variability (HRV) in 10 volunteers who went about
their daily lives while undergoing continuous heart rate monitoring 8. Although the statistical
effect size was small, significant correlations have been found between the group’s HRV and
the solar wind speed, Kp, Ap, solar radio flux, cosmic ray counts, Schumann Resonance power,
and intensity variations in the magnetic field. In a follow-up investigation, a study was
conducted in which HRV was measured in volunteer human subjects over the course of 5 weeks
while simultaneously collecting environmental data 9. Changes in the cosmic ray flux and solar
radio flux, and in the Schumann Resonance power were found to be correlated with increased
HRV and parasympathetic activity.
In a recent study in a metropolitan area in Spain, an epidemiological approach was used to
examine cardiovascular related hospital admissions over the course of a year. Using an Event
Coincidence Analysis statistical method, the investigators observed clustered events for the 1st
and the 3rd Schumann Resonance frequencies (ECA shuffle-surrogate test p = .01 and p < .01)10.
A related finding in a previous study is the observation geomagnetic activity correlated with the
heart attack incidence rate in 14 large hospitals in St Petersburg for the period 1989-1990 11.
Collectively, these findings support the hypothesis that weakly energetic environmental
phenomena can affect human physiology, with clinical significance.
Electromagnetic Radiation Effects on Mammals
Many studies have shown that mammals are sensitive to changes in electromagnetic radiation.
A wide variety of animals have been studied 7, including mice, rats (multiple strains)12, rabbits
and non-human primates 13. Many of these early studies were undertaken in response to the
development of the United States space program.
A particularly intriguing topic is the neurophysiological effect of electromagnetic fields,
including observations in the VLF and extremely low frequency (ELF) ranges, in which the
Schumann Resonances occur. For example, freshly isolated chick and cat cerebral tissues
exposed to sinusoidal electric fields at 1, 16, and 32 or 75 Hz, with electric gradients in air of 5,
10, 56, and 100 V/m, exhibit a general trend toward a reduction in the release of preincubated
45-Ca2+ 14. Both frequency and amplitude sensitivities were observed. These findings are
potentially relevant to the human response to the Schumann Resonances. The Schumann
Resonance frequencies start at 7.8 Hz and progress by increments that describe the overtone
series at about 13.7, 19.6, 25.5, 31.4, 37.3, and 43.2 Hz. The first five modes agree with the
frequency range of the first four electroencephalogram (EEG) bands with the primary EEG
frequency bands being Delta, 0.5 to 4 Hz, Theta, 4-8 Hz, Alpha, 8-13 Hz and 13 to 30 Hz.
3

Interestingly, the band at 7.8 Hz is observed with subjects in a state of relaxation and that at
13.7 Hz with subjects in a state of concentration. Based upon these observations, we need to
explore more deeply how a suppression of the Schumann Resonances affects these two EEG
states in humans.
Could the Absence of the Schumann Resonance be a Stressor for Humans?
Observations relating physiological responses to weakly energetic phenomenon are intriguing,
but they become even more so in view of NASA’s human exploration plans. In this context the
Schumann Resonances take center stage. While the orbit of the ISS is low enough that it is still
influenced by the Schumann Resonances, the moon is clearly far beyond their influence. What
about the Apollo era astronauts? They certainly experienced a lack of Schumann Resonances
while on the moon. But, given the short duration of these missions and other factors, effects
would have been difficult to discern. Now, since NASA is on the brink of returning astronauts to
the moon for much longer duration missions, the question “What happens to human physiology
beyond the reach of the Schumann Resonances?” becomes relevant. In preparation for NASA’s
new moon missions, investigations of the Schumann Resonances and human physiology, via
earth-based studies, is especially warranted and timely.
An Opportunity to Study Human and Model Organism in the Absence of the Schumann
Resonance: The “Berlin Magnetically Shielded Room”
The Schumann Resonances are present everywhere on earth, and they are difficult to shield.
For that reason, it is very challenging to conduct experiments of any kind that are not subject to
the Schumann Resonances. Any experimentally imposed electromagnetic field exposures are
invariably superimposed onto Schumann Resonances plus other background electromagnetic
fields that can vary substantially as a function of time and from one location to another.
“Clean” experiments are extremely difficult to conduct.
To perform careful experiments and to investigate what happens in the absence of the
Schumann Resonance requires exceptionally rigorous shielding of electromagnetic fields. Over
the last 40 years, considerable effort has been expended to create “magnetically shielded
rooms,” primarily in Japan 15 and in Germany 16, so that experiments on both biological systems
and physical systems can be conducted in the near-complete absence of ambient
electromagnetic fields, including the Schumann Resonances. The Berlin Magnetically Shielded
Room (BMSR), located at the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (Federal Metrology
Institute of Germany) is one such facility 17. The core of the BMSR is a cube-shaped structure
consisting of 8 shells that provide state-of-the-art electromagnetic shielding. The outer shell
consists of a seamless layer of aluminum, which acts as an eddy current shield. The remaining
seven shells consist of double-layered high-permeable mu-metal sheets (µ-metal, a soft
ferromagnetic nickel–iron alloy with very high permeability) with non-magnetic spacings.
Considering all 8 layers, the walls of the BSMR core are more than 1 meter thick. The inside
4

space measures 2.25 m x 2.25 m x 2.25 m, and is designed to accommodate human studies.

Fig. 2. The Berlin Magnetically Shielded Room is a specialized facility designed for magnetic and
bio-magnetic studies. The space inside the rigorously shielded room measures 2.25 m x 2.25 m
x 2.25 m and is designed to accommodate human studies, with accessory rooms to support
monitoring of human study participants.
An important additional feature of the shielding performance of the BMSR is an orthogonal set
of large coils outside of the 8-layered core structure. These coils compensate for Earth’s steady
magnetic field, but also allow for active shielding.
The performance of the BMSR is excellent, especially in the low-frequency range (1-50 Hz) that
is most relevant to the Schumann Resonances.

5

Recommended Studies in Rodents at the Berlin Magnetically Shielded Room (BMSR)
a. The authors of this white paper recommend that a heart rate variability (HRV) study in
rodents be conducted at the BMSR, with shielded and un-shielded conditions to be the
primary independent variable. Such a study will help to establish a convenient animal
experimental system for examining autonomic nervous system physiology in relation to
weak electromagnetic fields that can be transferred to the moon, when Space Biology
experiments at that location become available. A rodent model will be complimentary
to humans on the moon. Follow-on rodent studies will be planned based on these
results.
Recommended Studies in Humans at the Berlin Magnetically Shielded Room (BMSR)
a. The authors of this white paper recommend that a heart rate variability (HRV) study be
conducted in humans, at the BMSR.
b. We propose EEG studies on healthy human subjects to be conducted simultaneously
inside and outside the BMSR, each test with its own control for states of relaxation and
states of concentration.
c. We will also explore how the Schumann Resonances impact the circadian rhythms of
subjects inside and outside of the BMSR by measuring the melatonin secretion of the
subjects and its variation during the day. We will perform strict clinical and biological
observations to detect symptoms of sleep/vigilance/mood/appetite disturbances.
Summary
Substantial evidence supports the notion that the human autonomic nervous system (ANS)
responds to changes in solar and geomagnetic activity, affecting human health and human
performance. In some countries magnetic field disturbances are already included in public
weather forecast reports to account for human susceptibility to large variations in the magnetic
field. For NASA, the absence of the Schumann Resonances (SR) field in spaceflight beyond low
Earth orbit may pose a risk to astronauts, especially during long duration missions. Exploration
of the coupling between the Schumann Resonances and physiology is possible in the unique
environment of spaceflight beyond low Earth orbit (where SR can be artificially added), as well
as in ground-based magnetically shielded facilities, such as the Berlin Magnetically Shielded
Room, where the ambient terrestrial SR can be shielded. The extent of the effect of variation in
SR amplitude and frequency on human physiology and performance can be studied and
characterized using physiological measurements such as the Heart Rate Variability and by
conducting sleep studies.

6

References
1. Schlegel, K. & Füllekrug, M. Schumann resonance parameter changes during high-energy
particle precipitation. J. Geophys. Res. 104, 10111–10118 (1999).
2. Schumann, W. O. Über die Ausbreitung sehr langer elektrischer Wellen um die Erde und die
Signale des Blitzes. Nuovo Cim 9, 1116–1138 (1952).
3. Balser, M. & Wagner, C. A. Observations of Earth–Ionosphere Cavity Resonances. Nature
188, 638–641 (1960).
4. Breus, T. K. et al. Biological effects of solar activity. Origins Life Evol Biosphere 26, 497–
498 (1996).
5. König, H. L., Krueger, A. P., Lang, S. & Sönning, W. Biologic Effects of Environmental
Electromagnetism. (Springer New York, 1981). doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-5859-9.
6. Mattoni, M., Ahn, S., Fröhlich, C. & Fröhlich, F. Exploring the relationship between
geomagnetic activity and human heart rate variability. Eur J Appl Physiol 120, 1371–1381
(2020).
7. Cherry, N. Schumann Resonances, a plausible biophysical mechanism for the human health
effects of Solar/Geomagnetic Activity. Natural Hazards 26, 279–331 (2002).
8. McCraty, R. et al. Synchronization of Human Autonomic Nervous System Rhythms with
Geomagnetic Activity in Human Subjects. IJERPH 14, 770 (2017).
9. Alabdulgader, A. et al. Long-Term Study of Heart Rate Variability Responses to Changes in
the Solar and Geomagnetic Environment. Sci Rep 8, 2663 (2018).
10. Fdez-Arroyabe, P., Fornieles-Callejón, J., Santurtún, A., Szangolies, L. & Donner, R. V.
Schumann resonance and cardiovascular hospital admission in the area of Granada, Spain:
An event coincidence analysis approach. Science of The Total Environment 705, 135813
(2020).
11. Ptitsyna, N. G., Villoresi, G., Dorman, L. I., Iucci, N. & Tyasto, M. I. Natural and man-made
low-frequency magnetic fields as a potential health hazard. Успехи физических наук 168,
767–791 (1998).
12. Persinger, M. A. Open-field behavior in rats exposed prenatally to a low intensity-low
frequency, rotating magnetic field. Dev. Psychobiol. 2, 168–171 (1969).
13. Gavalas-Medici, R. & Day-Magdaleno, S. R. Extremely low frequency, weak electric fields
affect schedule-controlled behaviour of monkeys. Nature 261, 256–259 (1976).
14. Bawin, S. M. & Adey, W. R. Sensitivity of calcium binding in cerebral tissue to weak
environmental electric fields oscillating at low frequency. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 73, 1999–2003 (1976).
15. Kelhä, V. O. Construction And Performance Of The Otaniemi Magnetically Shielded Room.
in Biomagnetism (eds. Erné, S. N., Hahlbohm, H.-D. & Lübbig, H.) 33–50 (De Gruyter,
1981). doi:10.1515/9783110863529-004.
16. Mager, A. The Berlin Magnetically Shielded Room (BMSR), Section A: Design And
Construction. in Biomagnetism (eds. Erné, S. N., Hahlbohm, H.-D. & Lübbig, H.) 51–78 (De
Gruyter, 1981). doi:10.1515/9783110863529-005.
17. Bork, J., Hahlbohm, H. & Klein, R. The 8-layered magnetically shielded room of the PTB:
Design and construction. (2001).

7

