ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 18 March 2021
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.610466

Neural Correlates of the Shamanic
State of Consciousness
Emma R. Huels 1,2,3† , Hyoungkyu Kim 2,3† , UnCheol Lee 1,2,3 , Tarik Bel-Bahar 4 , Angelo
V. Colmenero 5 , Amanda Nelson 2 , Stefanie Blain-Moraes 6 , George A. Mashour 1,2,3
and Richard E. Harris 1,7 *
1

Edited by:

Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 2 Department of Anesthesiology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3 Center for Consciousness Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, United States, 4 Division of Translational Epidemiology, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY, United States,
5
The Graduate Center, City University of New York, New York, NY, United States, 6 School of Physical and Occupational
Therapy, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 7 Chronic Pain and Fatigue Research Center, Department of
Anesthesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States

Gopikrishna Deshpande,
Auburn University, United States
Reviewed by:
Lorenzo Pasquini,
Klinikum rechts der Isar der
Technischen Universität München,
Germany
David Luke,
University of Greenwich,
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Richard E. Harris
reharris@med.umich.edu
†

These authors have contributed
equally to this work

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Cognitive Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
Received: 25 September 2020
Accepted: 25 February 2021
Published: 18 March 2021
Citation:
Huels ER, Kim H, Lee U, Bel-Bahar T,
Colmenero AV, Nelson A,
Blain-Moraes S, Mashour GA and
Harris RE (2021) Neural Correlates of
the Shamanic State
of Consciousness.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 15:610466.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.610466

Psychedelics have been recognized as model interventions for studying altered states of
consciousness. However, few empirical studies of the shamanic state of consciousness,
which is anecdotally similar to the psychedelic state, exist. We investigated the neural
correlates of shamanic trance using high-density electroencephalography (EEG) in
24 shamanic practitioners and 24 healthy controls during rest, shamanic drumming, and
classical music listening, followed by an assessment of altered states of consciousness.
EEG data were used to assess changes in absolute power, connectivity, signal diversity,
and criticality, which were correlated with assessment measures. We also compared
assessment scores to those of individuals in a previous study under the influence of
psychedelics. Shamanic practitioners were significantly different from controls in several
domains of altered states of consciousness, with scores comparable to or exceeding that
of healthy volunteers under the influence of psychedelics. Practitioners also displayed
increased gamma power during drumming that positively correlated with elementary
visual alterations. Furthermore, shamanic practitioners had decreased low alpha and
increased low beta connectivity during drumming and classical music and decreased
neural signal diversity in the gamma band during drumming that inversely correlated with
insightfulness. Finally, criticality in practitioners was increased during drumming in the
low and high beta and gamma bands, with increases in the low beta band correlating
with complex imagery and elementary visual alterations. These findings suggest that
psychedelic drug-induced and non-pharmacologic alterations in consciousness have
overlapping phenomenal traits but are distinct states of consciousness, as reflected by
the unique brain-related changes during shamanic trance compared to previous literature
investigating the psychedelic state.
Keywords: shamanism, consciousness, EEG, altered states of consciousness, Trance

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

1

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

addressed to compare this unique state of consciousness to other
altered states.
Thus, we investigated the shamanic state of consciousness
using a validated assessment of altered states of consciousness
and high-density electroencephalography (EEG) in both
experienced shamanic practitioners and naïve control
participants. While spectral analyses remain standard in
many EEG studies, recent investigations regarding altered states
of consciousness have utilized other computational measures to
characterize brain activity, such as functional connectivity (Lee
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019), signal diversity (Li and Mashour,
2019; Timmermann et al., 2019; Pal et al., 2020), and criticality
(Kitzbichler et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2016, 2017; Lee et al., 2019).
Each of these measures informs on various attributes of the
neural signal—functional relationships, complexity (i.e., number
of different patterns in the signal), and the balance between
order and disorder, respectively—that better elucidate the neural
correlates underlying brain states. Thus, we characterized EEG
changes during shamanic drumming using spectral analysis,
connectivity, signal diversity, and criticality and determined
their relationship to changes in a variety of domains used to
characterize altered states of consciousness. Furthermore, we
compared these self-reported changes in consciousness during
shamanic trance to the altered state of consciousness induced by
psychedelic substances.

INTRODUCTION
Recent studies regarding the neuroscience of consciousness have
leveraged altered states of consciousness as model systems,
such as the psychedelic state (Johnson et al., 2019). However,
the use of pharmacologic agents to induce altered states of
consciousness introduces potential confounds by pharmacologic
manipulation of ‘‘off-target’’ brain receptors. For example, while
studies have reported the 5HT2A receptor as crucial for the
induction of altered states of consciousness via serotonergic
psychedelics (Kraehenmann et al., 2017; Preller et al., 2018),
these compounds may also bind to other serotonergic and
non-serotonergic receptor sites (Halberstadt and Geyer, 2011),
or possibly 5HT2A receptor sites not crucial to the psychedelic
experience. For example, 5HT2A receptors are present in the
gut (Fiorica-Howells et al., 2002; O’Mahony et al., 2015) and
it is reasonable to question the importance of such receptors
in the induction of the psychedelic state. In contrast, shamanic
trance, which is an altered state of consciousness anecdotally
similar to the psychedelic state, can be achieved with or without
the use of psychedelic substances by listening to repetitive
drumming (Krippner, 2000). During shamanic trance, the
shaman (in cases of indigenous tribes) or shamanic practitioner
(in cases of neo-shamanism in the western world) enters an
altered state of consciousness, termed the shamanic state of
consciousness (Harner, 1980), to offer physical, psychological, or
spiritual healing for others. In this state, shamanic practitioners
endure changes in consciousness similar to individuals under
the influence of psychedelic substances, such as mystical
experiences, feelings of disembodiment or flight, or feelings
of ego dissolution (Winkelman, 2013). Despite its universality
in ancient civilizations (Tributsch, 2018), increasing popularity
in the present day, and semblance to psychedelically-induced
altered states, empirical studies of shamanic trance remain
limited. Elucidating the neural correlates of this unique altered
state of consciousness may offer valuable insights into the
neurobiology of consciousness, particularly how changes in the
phenomenal content of consciousness arise in the absence of
pharmacologic intervention.
To date, only two neuroimaging studies have investigated
brain activity in shamanic practitioners during shamanic
trance. Using functional MRI, Hove et al. found increased
hub activity in key regions in default mode and controlrelated networks during the shamanic state (Hove et al.,
2016). Functional connectivity between these regions was also
increased during trance, suggesting an interaction between
these networks. Research using electroencephalographic activity
during the shamanic state of consciousness revealed increased
low (13–20 Hz) and high (21–50 Hz) beta activity, as well as
an anterior-posterior shift in power during the transition from
normal to trance state (Flor-Henry et al., 2017). Although these
studies contributed to our knowledge of the shamanic state of
consciousness, the Hove et al. (2016) trial lacked non-shamanic
practitioner controls and Flor-Henry et al. (2017) examined
data from only a single shamanic practitioner. Furthermore,
these past studies did not correlate neurobiological metrics with
the subjective experiences of this state. These gaps must be

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics
This study was approved by the University of Michigan
Institutional Review Board (HUM00089064). Written informed
consent was obtained from all participants before study
procedures.

Participants
Two separate populations were recruited for this study:
24 experienced shamanic healing practitioners and 24 ageand sex-matched control participants. Shamanic practitioner
inclusion criteria were as follows: five or more years of practice
in shamanic techniques; performed a minimum of 40 shamanic
healing sessions over the last 5 years, primarily focused on
healing individual people; received training in at least one
shamanic tradition or style under expert supervision; used
rhythmic drumming during shamanic journeying and healing
practice; and possessed the ability to enter a shamanic trance
in 15 min and complete a shamanic healing session in 30 min
while sitting still and quiet. Practitioners were excluded if
they had a history of traumatic brain injury or epilepsy.
Control participants were age- and sex-matched to shamanic
practitioners with the following inclusion criteria: no current
or past experience or interest in shamanic practice or media
involving shamanism; no current or past history of meditation,
spiritual healing, or spiritual training; no current or past history
of hallucinogen, entheogen, or psychedelic drug use; no current
or past experience with trance or hypnosis, or interest relating
to media of such themes; and no current or past history of
being a drummer, frequent listening to drumming music, or a

2

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

history of professional musicianship. Control participants were
excluded if they had a current or past diagnosis of depression,
anxiety, schizophrenia, or other serious psychological disorders,
untreated major physical or psychological illness, a history
of traumatic brain injury, or a history of epilepsy. Subjects
were excluded from analyses for technical difficulties related to
EEG acquisition (n = 5), EEG data quality issues (n = 4), or
lack of questionnaire data (n = 2), resulting in 18 shamanic
practitioners and 19 control participants in the final cohort for
analysis. Demographics for these participants are illustrated in
Supplementary Table 1.

Classical Music Experiment
The classical music experiment was meant to function as a
negative control for the shamanic drumming experiment and
entailed 15 min of classic music listening, which consisted
of two songs played in succession. The first song, which was
Beethoven’s ‘‘Sonata No.5 in F Major for Violin and Piano,
Op. 24, ‘‘Spring’’: I. Allegro,’’ was a mixture of piano and
violin (Beethoven, 1801/2013, track 20). The second piece,
Mozart’s ‘‘Sonata for Piano No. 15 in F Major, K. 533: I.
Allegro,’’ was piano only (Mozart, 1788/2009, track 43).
These pieces were chosen because they had some degree of
repetition, similar to the shamanic drumming recording.
Additionally, unlike most musical options, classical music is
free of language or singing, furthering its similarities to the
shamanic drumming recording. Both shamanic practitioners
and control participants were asked to listen with their
eyes closed during this time and shamanic practitioners
were explicitly asked to not enter a shamanic trance.
Participants again filled out the OAV scale following classical
music listening.

Pre-study Procedures
Before their study visit, shamanic practitioners were asked to
practice entering a shamanic trance during the 25 min of
rhythmic drumming music to be played during the experiment
(Harner, 1997) while control participants were asked to listen
to the same pre-recorded drumming without any attempts at
entering a shamanic trance. This recording, entitled ‘‘30-min
solo drumming journey with callback’’ from Michael Harner’s
Shamanic Journey Solo and Double Drumming, consisted of
rhythmic solo drumming without the accompaniment of other
instruments. We combined the original 15-min drumming piece
(Harner, 1997) with the middle 10 min of this piece repeated, for
a total of 25 min.

Qualitative Analysis
The 66-item OAV Scale questionnaire data were pooled
into 11 domains according to previous literature (Studerus
et al., 2010) including experience of unity, spiritual experience,
blissful state, insightfulness, disembodiment, impaired control
and cognition, anxiety, complex imagery, elementary visual
alterations, audio-visual synesthesia, and changed meaning of
percepts. The percent of the theoretical scale maximum was
calculated for each domain for each individual, followed by the
mean and standard error of the mean for each group (shamanic
practitioners or control participants).

Study Design
Participants underwent baseline EEG recordings with their eyes
open for 5 mins and closed for 5 mins. Following baseline
recordings, each participant underwent three experimental
blocks: cognitive testing, shamanic drumming, and classical
music listening. The order of blocks was counterbalanced
between groups. Participants were asked to rest again with
their eyes opened and closed for 5 min following the last
experiment. EEG data were collected continuously throughout
all experiments. Example study day timelines are illustrated in
Figure 1A. Given that this manuscript is centered on brain
activity during the shamanic state of consciousness, cognitive
testing results will not be discussed.

EEG Acquisition
Participants were fitted with a 129-channel HydroCel Geodesic
Sensor Net (Electrical Geodesics, Inc./Magstim EGI Eugene, OR,
USA) according to head circumference. EEG data were acquired
at a 500–1,000 Hz sampling rate with a vertex reference using
NetAmps 400 amplifier and Netstation 4.5 software. Channel
impedances were reduced to below 50 kΩ per the manufacturer’s
instruction.

Shamanic Healing Experiment
During the shamanic healing experiment, shamanic practitioners
and controls listened to the same pre-recorded drumming
(Harner, 1997) they listened to at home before the study
visit. Shamanic practitioners were asked to conduct shamanic
healing during this time, during which they entered an altered
state of consciousness to glean information to be used for the
physical, psychological, or spiritual healing of a client not present
during the study. Control participants were instructed to rest
quietly and both groups were asked to keep their eyes closed
during the drumming period. Following the drumming period,
shamanic practitioners and controls completed an Altered
States of Consciousness questionnaire known as the OAV scale
(Bodmer et al., 1994), which contains 66 items about their
subjective experience. Of note, we used the English version of this
questionnaire, which has been previously validated in German
(Bodmer et al., 1994).

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

EEG Analysis
Using the MATLAB open-source toolbox EEGLab (Delorme
and Makeig, 2004), data were visually inspected for artifact
and preprocessed via resampling to 500 Hz as necessary,
bandpass filtering between 1–45 Hz, and re-referencing to the
global average. Data were epoched into 10-s non-overlapping
windows; all analyses were conducted on sequential 10-s
windows. Subsequent analyses focused on absolute power,
functional connectivity, neural signal diversity, and criticality
(Figure 1B) within each of the following frequency bands:
delta 1–4 Hz, theta 4–8 Hz, low alpha 8–10 Hz, high alpha
10–13 Hz, low beta 13–20 Hz, high beta 20–30 Hz, and
gamma 30–45 Hz (except for connectivity, which was limited
to 30–35 Hz to ensure the reliability of this measure). While
we did not collect electromyography data to control for

3

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

FIGURE 1 | Study design. (A) Example timelines of a typical study day based on a given experiment block. Each individual was randomized to the order they
underwent cognitive testing, shamanic drumming, and classical music listening. Eyes open and eyes closed resting periods occurred at the beginning and end of the
experimental day. The Altered States of Consciousness Questionnaire, known as the OAV scale, was administered following classical music and shamanic
drumming. (B) All participants underwent high-density electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings during drumming, classical music, and periods of eye-opening and
closure. Following preprocessing, EEG signals were used to compute subsequent measures within each frequency band, including the power spectrum, functional
connectivity measured by weighted Phase Lag Index, signal diversity measured by Lempel-Ziv complexity (image referenced from Leemburg and Bassetti, 2018),
and criticality measured by the pair correlation function.

muscle artifact, we did not anticipate differences in muscle
contamination across participants and conditions, meaning any
differences in the gamma frequency band were presumably
from electroencephalographic differences. EEG measures were
computed for the full duration of periods of eye closure (5 min)
and shamanic drumming (25 min). Analyses of brain activity

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

during classical music were performed on the first song period
(∼10 min).

Spectral Analysis
Spectral power was calculated using the ‘‘spectrogram.m’’
function in the MATLAB Signal Processing Toolbox (time

4

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

Criticality
Criticality, a balanced state between order and disorder (Bak
et al., 1988), is observed ubiquitously in physical and biological
systems and is accompanied by various functional benefits,
including large information storage, optimal information
transmission, and flexible response to external stimuli (Muñoz,
2018). Many computational and experimental studies suggest
that human and animal brain functioning resides near a
critical point during conscious wakefulness (Lee and Mashour,
2018) and a loss of criticality induces altered states of
consciousness such as sleep, anesthesia, and unresponsive
wakefulness syndrome (Kitzbichler et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2016,
2017; Lee et al., 2019). We assessed criticality using the pair
correlation function (PCF), which is the variance of network
synchronization, reflecting network susceptibility to internal and
external perturbations (e.g., from stimuli; Yoon et al., 2015).
PCF is maximal at a critical point and gradually decreases as a
system moves toward a sub- or super-critical state (Kim and Lee,
2019). Recently, the reliability of PCF in evaluation of the level
of consciousness was supported with a computational model and
EEG during general anesthesia (Kim and Lee, 2019).

window: 3 s hamming window, overlap: 50%) based on
the short-time Fourier transform. For each state (eyes
closed, classical music, drumming), absolute power within
each frequency band was averaged across all time windows
and channels.

Functional Connectivity
Functional connectivity was assessed using the average weighted
Phase Lag Index (wPLI), which measures the phase lead-lag
relationship between two signals. If two signals are found to be
functionally coupled within a given frequency band, the resulting
wPLI value will be high within that band. wPLI is robust to
the EEG volume conduction problem (Stam et al., 2007; Vinck
et al., 2011) and improves Phase Lag Index with weights of
the imaginary part of the cross-spectrum, reducing noise and
volume conduction effects. When the imaginary part of the crossspectrum is = [X],
wPLI =

|E{={X}}|
|E{|={X}|sgn(={X})}|
=
E{|={X}|}
E{|={X}|}

where the signed Phase Lag Index is the numerator normalized
by the denominator, the imaginary part of the cross-spectrum.
The wPLI was calculated for each frequency band and averaged
across time and all channels in each state.

PCF = N {< Re2 [z(t)] >t − < Re[z(t)] >2t }
where Re[z(t)] is the real part of the z(t).

Neural Signal Diversity
Recent studies examining psychedelic-induced altered states of
consciousness have sought to characterize changes in signal
diversity (Schartner et al., 2017; Timmermann et al., 2019),
which reflects the number of unique (i.e., diverse) patterns
within a signal. Given the aforementioned overlap between the
psychedelic state and the shamanic state of consciousness, we
measured and compared the neural signal diversity of each
state using Lempel-Ziv complexity (LZc), which calculates the
temporal complexity of the signal by computing the number of
distinct subsequences through the whole signal (Lempel and Ziv,
1976; Figure 1B, image referenced from Leemburg and Bassetti,
2018). The time series of each EEG epoch was binarized using
the median value (M) of each time series (Zhang et al., 2001;
Leemburg and Bassetti, 2018) as a threshold.

z = r eiψ =

where Ψ is the order parameter phase. The absolute value r = |z|
represents the degree of synchronization. The r is equal to zero
when the phases of nodes are uniformly distributed and one
when all the nodes have the same phase.

Statistical Analysis
For comparison of OAV domain scores, Wilcoxon signed-rank
tests were used to assess differences in paired samples, and
Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used to assess differences between
shamanic practitioners and controls. With permission from
Studerus et al. (2010) and using open-access data, we used
the mean and standard deviation to compare OAV domain
scores of shamanic practitioners and individuals under the
influence of psychedelic substances using unpaired t-tests.
This comparison included data collected from 43 studies that
administered psilocybin (115–350 µg/kg orally; low to high
dose), ketamine (6–12 µg kg−1 min−1 intravenously; medium
to high dose), or MDMA (1.5–1.7 mg/kg orally; medium dose)
to healthy volunteers. Given the aggregation of studies, it is
unclear to what degree these data included naive vs. experienced
psychedelic users. A two-way mixed analysis of variance was
used to assess differences in EEG measures between groups
(shamanic practitioner vs. control; between-subject factor) and
across conditions (eyes closed vs. classical music vs. drumming;
within-subject factor), as well as any interaction between these
two factors (group × condition). Exploratory post-hoc analysis
of group differences within each condition was conducted
using unpaired t-tests. Given our small sample size and the
exploratory nature of post hoc tests, we did not adjust for multiple

s(n) = {0 if x (n) < M, 1 if x (n) ≥ M
where x(n) is each data point of the original time series and
the median value is M. The median value of each epoch is
used for the robustness to outliers and the invariance from the
signal amplitude.
A new subsequence of consecutive numbers (‘‘words’’) was
counted as c(n) through the binarized time series and normalized
by the theoretical maximum number of words b(n) = nlog2 n.
C (n) = c (n) b (n)
LZc was computed for each frequency band in each state and
averaged across time and channels. To better compare changes
in LZc during shamanic trance to those in previous literature
(i.e., psychedelic states), we computed LZc of the broadband
(1–45 Hz) signal, as well as within individual frequency bands.

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

1 XN
eiθj ,
j=1
N

5

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

Studerus et al. with our data from shamanic practitioners
and compared each of the domains for each drug condition
to shamanic practitioners using unpaired t-tests. As can be
seen in Figure 2C, shamanic practitioners experienced several
domains at or above the level of individuals under the influence
of various psychedelics. Specifically, the domains of complex
imagery (ketamine: p < 0.001; psilocybin: p = 0.0077; MDMA:
p < 0.001), experience of unity (ketamine: p = 0.0052; psilocybin:
p < 0.001; MDMA: p < 0.001), spiritual experience (ketamine:
p < 0.001; psilocybin: p < 0.001; MDMA: p < 0.001), and
insightfulness (ketamine: p < 0.001; psilocybin: p < 0.001;
MDMA: p < 0.001) appear to be greater for shamanic
practitioners during trance compared to healthy controls under
any of these very potent psychedelic compounds. Shamanic
practitioners were similar to MDMA in the domains of blissful
state (ketamine: p < 0.001; psilocybin: p = 0.0036; MDMA:
p = 0.14), audio-visual synesthesia (ketamine: p = 0.031;
psilocybin: p = 0.0017; MDMA: p = 0.96), and impaired control
and cognition (ketamine: p < 0.001; psilocybin: p = 0.0045;
MDMA: p = 0.16), comparable to ketamine in the domain
of disembodiment (ketamine: p = 0.46; psilocybin: p < 0.001;
MDMA: p < 0.001), and similar to ketamine and psilocybin
in elementary visual alterations (ketamine: p = 0.28; psilocybin:
p = 0.27; MDMA: p < 0.001). Additionally, individuals under
the influence of ketamine had significantly higher anxiety scores
(ketamine: p = 0.037; psilocybin: p = 0.27; MDMA: p = 0.99)
compared to shamanic practitioners during drumming. Finally,
practitioners were similar to all three drugs in the domain of
changed meaning of percepts (ketamine: p = 0.92; psilocybin:
p = 0.52; MDMA: p = 0.63). Additional statistical output
measures are detailed in Supplementary Table 2.

comparisons. Spearman correlations were conducted to assess
relationships between EEG measures during drumming that
were statistically significantly different between groups and OAV
domain scores in shamanic practitioners that were significantly
different from the control group during shamanic drumming.
Again, we did not adjust for multiple comparisons given the
exploratory nature or the limited sample size. Findings were
considered statistically significant if p < 0.05.

Data Availability
All data and code used for this project will be made available
upon request of the authors with a data-sharing agreement
between institutions.

RESULTS
Shamanic Practitioners Enter an Altered
State of Consciousness During Drumming
We first evaluated differences in OAV domain scores to
verify that shamanic practitioners entered an altered state of
consciousness. Shamanic practitioners had significantly greater
scores than control participants in 8 of the 11 domains
during shamanic healing, including complex imagery [Z = 4.22,
p < 0.001, 95% CI (0.30, 0.57)], experience of unity [Z = 4.04,
p < 0.001, 95% CI (0.33, 0.65)], spiritual experience [Z = 4.87,
p < 0.001, 95% CI (0.33, 0.60)], blissful state [Z = 4.39, p < 0.001,
95% CI (0.30, 0.60)], disembodiment [Z = 4.4, p < 0.001,
95% CI (0.23, 0.67)], insightfulness [Z = 4.06, p < 0.001,
95% CI (0.23, 0.57)], elementary visual alterations [Z = 2.43,
p = 0.0159, 95% CI (0.033, 0.40)], and changed meaning of
percepts [Z = 3.22, p = 0.00136, 95% CI (0.033, 0.40; Figure 2A)].
These differences did not exist when comparing OAV domain
scores during the classical music experiment (Figure 2B).
Furthermore, shamanic practitioners were significantly different
in all of the above domains except elementary visual alterations
when comparing their scores during shamanic drumming to
classical music (Z = 2.98 to Z = 3.62, p < 0.01 to p < 0.001),
indicating a majority of the increased scores were specific to the
shamanic drumming experiment. Finally, shamanic practitioners
had increased scores in audio-visual synesthesia [Z = −2.35,
p = 0.0199, 95% CI (−0.42, −0.033)] and control participants
had increased scores in blissful state [Z = −2.42, p = 0.017, 95%
CI (−0.23, −0.017)] during classical music listening compared
to drumming.

Absolute Gamma Power Increases During
Drumming in Shamanic Practitioners and
Correlates With Elementary Visual
Alterations
Next, we assessed differences in absolute power between
shamanic practitioners and controls during eyes closed, classical
music, and drumming (Figure 3A). There was a statistically
significant interaction between group and condition on gamma
power (Group × Condition: F (1.7,59.1) = 6.3, p = 0.005). Posthoc exploratory t-tests revealed shamanic practitioners had
significantly greater gamma power during drumming compared
to controls [t (29) = 2.16, p = 0.039, 95% CI (0.040, 1.43);
Figure 3B]. Furthermore, gamma power during drumming
positively correlated with the degree of elementary visual
alterations (rs = 0.52, p = 0.025; Figure 3C) in shamanic
practitioners.

Shamanic Practitioners Endure Changes in
Consciousness Similar to Yet Distinct
From the Psychedelic State
Given the overlap between the shamanic state of consciousness
and the psychedelic experience, we thought it would be
informative to compare the OAV domain scores from shamanic
practitioners with those of individuals under the influence of
psychedelic substances. Studerus et al. pooled OAV scores from
healthy individuals under the influence of psilocybin, ketamine,
and 3,4-Methyl-enedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA; Studerus
et al., 2010). With author permission, we replotted the mean
and standard error of the mean for each drug condition from

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Shamanic Practitioners Have Altered
Functional Connectivity in the Low Alpha
and Beta Bands During Drumming
We also examined differences in functional connectivity within
each state in shamanic practitioners and control participants
(Figure 4A). There was a significant main effect of group
on low alpha (F (1,35) = 5.6, p = 0.024) and low beta

6

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

FIGURE 2 | Shamanic practitioners enter an altered state of consciousness during shamanic drumming. (A) Shamanic Practitioners (SP, purple, n = 18) were
significantly different from control participants (CC, green, n = 19) during drumming in 8 of the 11 OAV domains. Each point represents the mean of all SP or CC for
the percent of the theoretical scale maximum for that domain. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. (B) SP did not differ from CC during classical
music listening on any of the domains. (C) We replotted the OAV mean and standard error for healthy controls taking psilocybin (green, n = 327), ketamine (blue,
n = 162), or MDMA (orange, n = 102) from Studerus et al. (2010) and compared these scores to those acquired from SP. Overall, SP had increased scores in several
domains compared to all three drug conditions, as well as similar scores in the remaining domains compared to various drug conditions.

(F (1,35) = 4.41, p = 0.043) connectivity. Post hoc t-tests
revealed that shamanic practitioners had significantly decreased
low alpha connectivity during drumming [t (27.2) = −2.45,
p = 0.021, 95% CI (0.00731, 0.0828)] and music [t (27.8) = −2.22,
p = 0.035, 95% CI (0.00374, 0.0938)] compared to control
participants (Figure 4B). Additionally, shamanic practitioners
had significantly greater connectivity in the low beta band during
drumming [t (22.1) = 2.11, p = 0.047, 95% CI (0.000352, 0.0432)]
and music [t (24.9) = 2.25, p = 0.033, 95% CI (0.00263, 0.0584)]
compared to controls (Figure 4B). These statistically significant
measures of connectivity did not correlate with any of the
OAV domains.

of broadband LZc revealed a statistically significant interaction
between group and condition (Group × Condition: F (2,70) = 3.7,
p = 0.03), post hoc t-tests did not reveal any significant differences
between groups.

Shamanic Practitioners Experience
Increased Criticality in Beta and Gamma
Bands During Drumming That Correlates
With OAV Domain Scores
Finally, we examined differences in criticality using the pair
correlation function (PCF; Figure 6A) during eyes closed, music,
and drumming. Given that the shamanic state of consciousness
is characterized by a high level of mental activity (Figure 2A),
we would anticipate increased PCF during shamanic trance
which would suggest increased criticality and, in turn, increased
metastability (i.e., patterns of global synchronization over time)
and network susceptibility to internal and external perturbations.
There was a main effect of group on PCF in the low beta
(F (1,35) = 4.59, p = 0.039) and high beta bands (F (1,35) = 5.94,
p = 0.02). For PCF in the gamma band, there were main
effects of both group (F (1,35) = 10.09, p = 0.003) and condition
(F (2, 70) = 5.93, p = 0.004). Exploratory post-hoc t-tests revealed
that, during drumming, shamanic practitioners had greater
PCF in the low beta (t (34.5) = 3.32, p = 0.00213, 95% CI
[0.00176, 0.00729]; Figure 6B1), high beta (t (33.2) = 3.29,
p = 0.00235, 95% CI [0.00273, 0.0115]; Figure 6B2), and

Lempel-Ziv Complexity in the Gamma
Band Decreases During Drumming in
Shamanic Practitioners and Correlates
With Feelings of Insightfulness
We evaluated differences in EEG signal diversity using
Lempel-Ziv complexity (LZc; Figure 5A). There was a significant
main effect of group on LZc in the gamma band (F (1,35) = 4.79,
p = 0.035). Post-hoc testing revealed that shamanic practitioners
had decreased LZc in the gamma band during drumming
(t (19.4) = −2.53, p = 0.02, 95% CI [−0.0274, −0.00262])
compared to control participants (Figure 5B). Furthermore, LZc
in the gamma band was negatively correlated with feelings of
insightfulness (rs = 0.5, p = 0.034; Figure 5C). While analysis

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

7

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

FIGURE 3 | Gamma power is greater in shamanic practitioners during the drumming and correlates with elementary visual alterations. (A) Power spectrogram
comparing the difference in power across frequencies (1–45 Hz) between shamanic practitioners (SP; n = 18) and control participants (CC; n = 19) during eyes
closed, classical music, and drumming periods. Warmer colors represent greater power in SP and cooler colors indicate more power in CC. The dotted line
represents the gamma frequency band (30–45 Hz), which was significantly different between groups during shamanic drumming. (B) Box plots representing the
mean absolute power of SP (purple) or CC (green) during eyes closed, drumming, and music. Whiskers represent the lower (25%) and upper (75%) quartiles and the
center band of each box represents the median for the group. SP had significantly greater gamma power during the drumming period compared to CC. Significance
is indicated by the key in the lower righthand corner of the figure. (C) We correlated absolute gamma power with each of the eight ASC domain scores that were
significantly different between groups during drumming in Figure 2A, revealing a positive correlation between absolute gamma power and the degree of elementary
visual alterations.

gamma (t (33.7) = 4.1, p < 0.001, 95% CI [0.00754, 0.0224];
Figure 6B3) bands compared to controls. Furthermore, PCF
in the low beta band positively correlated with the degree
of complex imagery (rs = 0.53, p = 0.023; Figure 6C1) and
elementary visual alterations (rs = 0.56, p = 0.015; Figure 6C2).
Shamanic practitioners also had greater PCF in the high beta
band during classical music (t (35) = 2.1, p = 0.043; Figure 6B2)
and the gamma band during classic music (t (31.5) = 2.75,
p = 0.00987) and eyes closed (t (31) = 2.16, p = 0.039;
Figure 6B3).

revealed that shamanic practitioners had increased absolute
gamma power during drumming, which positively correlated
with the degree of elementary visual alterations. Additionally,
practitioners had decreased low alpha and increased low beta
connectivity during drumming and classical music. Furthermore,
signal diversity in the gamma band was decreased in shamanic
practitioners during drumming, which negatively correlated
with feelings of insightfulness. Finally, PCF was increased in
the low beta, high beta, and gamma bands during drumming,
with increases in the low beta band positively correlating
with complex imagery and elementary visual alterations.
Additionally, PCF in the high beta band was increased during
classical music in shamanic practitioners compared to control
participants, as was PCF in the gamma band during eyes
closed and classical music. These findings suggest that, during
shamanic trance, shamanic practitioners enter an altered state
of consciousness that is accompanied by changes in a variety
of EEG measures that correlate with self-reported changes in
experience. Specifically, differences in gamma power, gamma
complexity, and low beta PCF were exclusive to shamanic
drumming and correlated with items on the OAV scale, meaning
they likely represent changes in brain activity specific to the
shamanic state of consciousness. In contrast, EEG changes
spreading across drumming and classical music, such as changes
in low alpha or low beta functional connectivity or high

DISCUSSION
Summary
In the largest and most comprehensive neuroimaging study
of shamanic practitioners to date, we characterized the
shamanic state of consciousness using high-density EEG and
a well-validated assessment for altered states of consciousness
known as the OAV scale. We revealed shamanic practitioners
to be significantly different from controls in a majority of the
OAV domains during drumming. Furthermore, these differences
were similar or greater in magnitude than those reported
by individuals under the influence of ketamine, psilocybin,
or MDMA. In addition to the main effects of the group
on a variety of EEG measures, post-hoc exploratory analyses

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

8

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

FIGURE 4 | Shamanic practitioners have increased low beta and decreased low alpha connectivity during drumming and classical music. (A) Differences in
functional connectivity, measured by weighted Phase Lag Index (wPLI), between shamanic practitioners (SP; n = 18) and control participants (CC; n = 19). Warmer
colors represent greater connectivity in SP while cooler colors indicate greater connectivity in CC. The dotted lines represent the low alpha (8–10 Hz) and low beta
(13–20 Hz) frequency bands, which were significantly different between groups. (B1,B2) Box plots illustrating the average wPLI in the low alpha (B1) or low beta (B2)
frequency bands in SP (purple) and CC (green) during eyes closed, drumming, and music. Whiskers represent the lower (25%) and upper (75%) quartiles and the
center band of each box represents the median for the group. SP experienced statistically significant decreases in wPLI in the low alpha band during classical music
and drumming compared to CC (B1), as well as statistically significant increases in the low beta band (B2). Significance is indicated by the key in the lower righthand
corner of the figure.

et al., 2012; Braboszcz et al., 2017; Kakumanu et al., 2018), with
some attributing elevations in gamma to enhanced perceptual
clarity (Cahn et al., 2010), spontaneous visual imagery (Luft et al.,
2019), or increased attentional effort (Braboszcz et al., 2017).
Other trance states, such as possession trance, are frequently
characterized by power changes in the theta, alpha, or beta bands
(Oohashi et al., 2002; Bastos et al., 2016; Kawai et al., 2017),
without analysis of the gamma band. Thus, while changes in
the other frequency bands are absent during shamanic trance,
it remains unknown whether our findings of increased gamma
power are comparable. While it is difficult to pinpoint the exact
reason for increased gamma power during shamanic trance, our
findings are in agreement with previous literature regarding the
shamanic state of consciousness and suggest similarities between
shamanic trance and meditative states.
In addition to increases in gamma power, shamanic
practitioners demonstrated decreased neural signal diversity
and increased criticality (i.e., PCF) in the gamma band during
drumming when compared to control participants. While studies
of signal diversity and criticality in non-pharmacologically
induced altered states of consciousness remain scarce, a recent
EEG study during meditation assessed changes in entropy and
metastability (Martínez Vivot et al., 2020), which is directly
related to criticality (e.g., increased metastability is associated
with increased criticality). Martínez Vivot et al. (2020) revealed
meditative practice to be characterized by increased entropy and

beta or gamma PCF, may represent trait-related changes in
shamanic practitioners.

The Shamanic State of Consciousness,
Gamma Oscillations, and Other Absorptive
States of Consciousness
To our knowledge, the only previous investigation of shamanic
trance in shamanic practitioners using EEG was by Flor-Henry
et al., who found increased absolute low (13–20 Hz) and high
(21–50 Hz) beta power during shamanic drumming (FlorHenry et al., 2017). These findings are similar to those of the
current study, as we found increased gamma power (30–45 Hz)
during drumming in shamanic practitioners compared to control
participants. While we did not see differences in the low
beta band, the presence of increased gamma power in both
investigations supports the involvement of gamma oscillations
in the shamanic state of consciousness. Gamma oscillations have
been implicated in a variety of cognitive processes, including
consciousness (Havlík, 2017), maintenance of visual images
within working memory (Ewerdwalbesloh et al., 2016), and visual
perception (Martinovic and Busch, 2011), which is relevant given
the correlation between gamma power and elementary visual
alterations. Furthermore, previous investigations of brain activity
during meditation have revealed increased gamma activity (Lutz
et al., 2004; Cahn et al., 2010; Fell et al., 2010; Berkovich-Ohana

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

9

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

FIGURE 5 | Shamanic practitioners have decreased neural signal diversity in the gamma band during drumming which is negatively correlated with feelings of
insightfulness. (A) Comparison of the Lempel-Ziv complexity (LZc), a surrogate measure of neural signal diversity, across frequencies in shamanic practitioners (SP;
n = 18) and controls (CC; n = 19). Warmer colors represent greater LZc in SP while cooler colors indicate greater LZc in CC. The dotted lines represent the gamma
band (30–45 Hz), which was significantly different between groups. (B) Box plots comparing the average LZc in the gamma band for SP (purple) and CC (green)
during eyes closed, classical music, and drumming. Whiskers represent the lower (25%) and upper (75%) quartiles and the center band of each box represents the
median for the group. SP experienced statistically significant decreases in LZc in the gamma band compared to CC. Significance is indicated by the key in the lower
righthand corner of the figure. (C) Correlations between LZc in the gamma band and ASC domain scores revealed a negative correlation between gamma LZc and
feelings of insightfulness.

(Doufesh et al., 2012, 2014). While these findings related to
Abrahamic religious practices differ from those of the current
study, an investigation of EEG changes in Carmelite nuns
during the recall of mystical experiences found changes in
theta and gamma power (Beauregard and Paquette, 2008),
with the authors attributing increases in gamma to individuals
entering a more absorptive state. Thus, the shamanic state of
consciousness appears to overlap more with religious or spiritual
practices coupled with mystical experiences characterized by
perturbations in conscious experience (i.e., unity with God,
visual imagery) rather than solely religious actions. Future
investigations of mystical experiences during religious or
spiritual practice, as well as other absorptive or contemplative
states, are needed.

decreased metastability in the gamma band. This is the inverse
of our findings, where shamanic practitioners had decreased
neural signal diversity and increased criticality in the gamma
band, which, by definition, indicates increased metastability
and brain network susceptibility. Given the paucity of research
evaluating these measures in the context of shamanic trance
or other absorptive states, it is difficult to discern the reason
for this difference. One such explanation could be a difference
in computational methods, as Martínez Vivot et al. (2020)
evaluated changes in sample entropy (compared to Lempel-Ziv
complexity) and utilized different techniques for measuring
metastability. Additionally, despite the similarities between
shamanic trance and deep meditative trance, they are distinct
states of consciousness that are achieved through different means
and for different purposes, meaning an inverse of findings may
not be surprising.
The comparison of EEG changes during the shamanic state
of consciousness and other spiritual or religious practices
remains less clear. Previous studies have detailed increased alpha
power (Abdullah and Omar, 2011; Al-Galal and Alshaikhli,
2017) and changes in relative alpha and theta power (Vaghefi
et al., 2015) while listening to the recitation of the Quran, as
well as increased approximate and sample entropy (Vaghefi
et al., 2019). Additionally, increased absolute alpha power has
been noted during catholic prayer (Barcelona et al., 2020), as
well as increased relative alpha power during Muslim prayer

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Shamanic Practitioners Enter an Altered
State of Consciousness Similar Yet
Distinct From the Psychedelic State
Our analyses revealed significant differences between shamanic
practitioners and control participants in 8 of the 11 OAV
domains during drumming, with elevations in those 8 domains
mirroring or exceeding domains altered during the psychedelic
state. This suggests that shamanic practitioners are entering
an altered state of consciousness during trance and confirms
the anecdotal overlap with the psychedelic state. However,

10

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

FIGURE 6 | Shamanic practitioners have increased criticality in beta and gamma bands during drumming, with low beta increases correlating with complex imagery
and elementary visual alterations. (A) Comparison of criticality, measured using a pair correlation function (PCF), across different frequencies between shamanic
practitioners (SP; n = 18) and control participants (CC; n = 19). Warmer colors indicate greater PCF in SP while cooler colors represent increased PCF in CC. Dotted
lines represent the low (13–20 Hz) and high (20–30 Hz) beta and gamma (30–45 Hz) bands, which were significantly different between SP and controls. (B1–B3) Box
plots illustrating the average PCF value for the low (B1) and high (B2) beta and gamma (B3) bands in SP (purple) and CC (green) during eyes closed, classical music,
and drumming. Whiskers represent the lower (25%) and upper (75%) quartiles and the center band of each box represents the median for the group. SP had greater
PCF in the low and high beta (B1,B2) and gamma (B3) bands during drumming compared to CC, with increases extending to the classic music condition in high
beta (B2) and gamma (B3) bands and the eyes closed condition in the gamma band (B3). Significance is indicated by the key in the lower righthand corner. (C1,C2)
Spearman correlations revealed a positive correlation between PCF in the low beta band and both complex imagery (C1) and elementary visual alterations (C2).

brew commonly used for shamanic practice that contains
the psychoactive substance N,N-dimethyltryptamine—it was
found to be unrelated to psychometric measures (Schenberg
et al., 2015). Thus, while the shamanic state of consciousness
involves similar changes in phenomenology as the psychedelic
state, the underlying neurobiology of shamanic trance appears
to be distinct from altered states of consciousness induced
by psychedelics.
While literature investigating functional connectivity during
the psychedelic state using EEG and MEG remains scarce, one
study did find changes in the lagged phase synchronization in
the delta band during psilocybin to be associated with feelings
of insightfulness and spiritual experience (Kometer et al., 2015).
Our findings suggest that while shamanic practitioners differed
from controls in low alpha and low beta connectivity, these
changes are not associated with the degree of assessed altered
states of consciousness. Furthermore, changes in connectivity
also occurred during classical music and, according to Figure 4A,
to some degree at baseline, possibly reflecting long-term
(i.e., trait) changes in low alpha and low beta connectivity in
shamanic practitioners.
Previous literature examining changes in neural signal
diversity during the psychedelic state have consistently revealed
increases in LZc (Schartner et al., 2017; Timmermann et al., 2019)

the shamanic state of consciousness was different from the
drug response in multiple OAV domains, suggesting that
shamanic trance is a distinct altered state and does not
perfectly correlate with the drug experience of any of the
three substances examined by Studerus et al. (2010), even ones
used for shamanic practice (e.g., psilocybin). This assertion
is supported by the lack of congruency between previous
EEG and magnetoencephalographic (MEG) findings during the
psychedelic state and the results of the current study. Past
studies have demonstrated widespread decreases in broadband
power (Riba et al., 2002, 2004; Muthukumaraswamy et al.,
2013; Kometer et al., 2015; Carhart-Harris et al., 2016;
Pallavicini et al., 2019), with an emphasis on decreases in
the alpha band that correlate with the degree of subjective
effects (Kometer et al., 2013; Carhart-Harris et al., 2016; Valle
et al., 2016; Timmermann et al., 2019). Given our results
demonstrating an overlap between self-reported changes in
consciousness during shamanic trance and the psychedelic state,
it is surprising that shamanic practitioners not only lacked
changes in alpha power but experienced increases in power
isolated to the gamma band that correlated with the degree of
elementary visual alterations. Although increased gamma power
has been reported during select studies of Ayahuasca exposure
(Don et al., 1998; Schenberg et al., 2015)—an Amazonian

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

11

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

turn, increased brain network susceptibility to perturbations
and metastability. Based on the assumption that the brain
during normal waking consciousness resides near criticality,
increased PCF of shamanic practitioners compared to the
control group implies the shamanic state of consciousness
shifts the brain state to the upper limit of the critical
zone. With heightened criticality, the brains of shamanic
practitioners may be more susceptible to internal and external
perturbations, which produce more diverse spatiotemporal brain
activity patterns and consequently allow for a ‘‘richer’’ or
more ‘‘diverse’’ conscious experience. This is supported by the
correlations between increased PCF in the low beta band and
the OAV domains of complex imagery and elementary visual
alterations. Furthermore, while PCF increases were greatest
during shamanic drumming, PCF was also increased during
classical music and eye closure in shamanic practitioners
compared to the control group, suggesting that shamanic
practice may induce enduring changes in criticality, shifting
the brain to reside in the upper bounds of the critical zone
long-term (i.e., over months or years). Future longitudinal
studies could expand these findings by examining criticality and
other EEG measures at various points within the lifetime of
shamanic practitioners.

that correlate with the strength of psychedelic-induced changes
in phenomenal content (Schartner et al., 2017; Timmermann
et al., 2019), particularly in visual domains. Yet, we found
that the shamanic state of consciousness was characterized by
decreases in neural signal diversity in the gamma band that
negatively correlated with feelings of insightfulness, suggesting
that decreased diversity in the neural signal was indicative
of a more profound experience. One possible explanation for
this discrepancy is that previous literature has focused on
broadband signal diversity rather than diversity within a given
frequency band. However, analysis of broadband LZc did not
reveal any significant differences between groups. When coupled
with the lack of decreased alpha power, our findings suggest
that while shamanic trance may be anecdotally similar to the
psychedelic state, they are discrete altered states of consciousness,
most likely with different underlying mechanisms by which
changes in the subjective experience originate. This is further
supported by previous literature demonstrating increased activity
in the default-mode network (DMN) during shamanic trance
(Hove et al., 2016) rather than the characteristic decreases
found during the psychedelic state (Carhart-Harris et al.,
2012, 2016; Palhano-Fontes et al., 2015), with decreases in
alpha power that correlated with feelings of ego dissolution
localizing to nodes of the DMN (Muthukumaraswamy et al.,
2013). Future studies should aim to investigate shamanic trance
with and without the use of pharmacological intervention to
further characterize the relationship between shamanic and
psychedelic states.

METHODOLOGIC STRENGTHS AND
WEAKNESSES
This study has many strengths. In addition to validating
the spectral changes noted in the only previous EEG study
of shamanic trance, we characterized the shamanic state of
consciousness using a variety of computational methods used
previously to assess other altered states of consciousness.
Furthermore, we investigated the relationship between such
measures and changes in consciousness reported by shamanic
practitioners. This allowed for the most comprehensive
characterization of the shamanic state of consciousness to
date while using the largest cohort of shamanic practitioners
reported in the literature. Finally, this study allowed for
the investigation of changes in phenomenal content in the
absence of pharmacologic manipulation. Given that psychedelic
agents indiscriminately act on brain regions based solely
on their receptor profile, the use of these substances may
produce confounding results by altering attributes of cortical
functioning unrelated to the altered state of consciousness being
probed. Thus, the ability to study altered states while free of
pharmacologic agents may provide a more direct approach to
elucidating the neural correlates of consciousness.
This study has some limitations. First, we did not collect
electromyography data to control for movement, meaning it
remains possible that our findings within the gamma band
are contaminated by muscle artifact. Additionally, our sample
size was small relative to many neuroimaging studies. This
led to the lack of adjustment for multiple comparisons in our
post hoc analyses due to their exploratory nature. Yet, it is
important to note that trend relationships (p = 0.052–0.07)
would remain for a majority of EEG measures (connectivity,
signal diversity) and almost all PCF results, excluding in the

The Shamanic State of Consciousness and
the Entropic Brain Hypothesis
According to the entropic brain hypothesis, consciousness
arises within a critical zone rather than a critical point
(Carhart-Harris et al., 2014), which is supported by a series
of studies demonstrating that a hierarchical modular structure
of the brain network extends a critical point to a critical
region (Moretti and Muñoz, 2013). The extended critical
region allows for increased sustainability, which in turn
enables the brain to maintain criticality under perturbations.
Furthermore, the entropic brain hypothesis suggests that normal
waking consciousness exists within a band positioned in the
middle of this critical zone and changes in consciousness
occur when pushed beyond the lower or upper limits of
this band. For example, sedatives and anesthetics shift the
brain downward, closer to a lower limit (i.e., sub-critical
or extremely ordered), and diminish conscious contents. On
the contrary, psychedelics shift the brain upward, closer to
the upper limit of the critical zone (i.e., super-critical or
extremely disordered) with richer conscious contents (CarhartHarris et al., 2014). This was recently demonstrated by
Atasoy et al., who provided empirical evidence for heightened
criticality during Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) using
human fMRI blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signals
(Atasoy et al., 2017).
In the current study, we found that shamanic trance increased
PCF in beta and gamma bands. As mentioned previously,
increased PCF is indicative of increased criticality, and in

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

12

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

Studerus et al. (2010). Recent literature examining the impact
of external stimulation during the psychedelic state found
that the greatest changes in brain activity (i.e., brain entropy)
occurred during eye closure (Mediano et al., 2020). Thus, the
heightened OAV scores in shamanic practitioners compared
to those of individuals under the influence of psychedelics
may be due to the inclusion of less intense experiences due
to eye-opening.
Finally, there was a lack of blinding between experimental
conditions or groups, which could have led to exaggerated OAV
scores in shamanic practitioners or decreased OAV scores in
the control group due to demand characteristics. However, we
attempted to reduce expectancies by randomizing the order of
experimental conditions.

high beta band during music (p = 0.065), would remain
significant (p < 0.05) after correction (Benjamini-Hochberg
procedure). It is unknown whether the relationships between
EEG measures and OAV domain scores would have survived
adjustment for multiple comparisons, meaning these exploratory
findings should be interpreted with a degree of caution.
Future studies should aim to include a larger cohort of
shamanic practitioners that is powered to formally investigate
this relationship.
Our cohort of shamanic practitioners had diverse
backgrounds of shamanic practice and rituals, which introduced
potential variability in our study population while also allowing
for greater generalizability of findings and ease of recruitment. A
summary of the shamanic traditions utilized by each practitioner
during normal, non-study shamanic trance sessions is detailed
in Supplementary Table 3.
Another limitation of this study is that our control
participants were asked to rest quietly during the shamanic
drumming period while our shamanic practitioners were asked
to enter a shamanic trance. This means shamanic practitioners
were cognitively engaged during this time while controls were
passively listening, which could have led to a difference in
EEG changes. However, unlike previous studies of the shamanic
state of consciousness, we collected data during classical music
as a contrast condition to identify brain activity specific to
shamanic trance rather than due to cognitive engagement.
Furthermore, a recent study investigating the effects of rhythmic
drumming on sparse EEG in healthy volunteers found that the
suggestion to enter a trance state during rhythmic drumming
elicited increased delta and decreased alpha activity, which
the authors attributed to increased relaxation or drowsiness
rather than effects of a trance state (Konopacki and Madison,
2018). Thus, our instruction for healthy volunteers to only
listen during shamanic drumming was likely still a comparable
control condition.
It is important to note that there were methodological
differences between the current study and that of Studerus et al.
that may potentially complicate the comparison of OAV domain
scores from shamanic practitioners and healthy volunteers under
the influence of psychedelics. First, the data used by Studerus
et al. (2010) was aggregated from 43 studies which varied by
methodology and dose. Specifically, doses for each of the three
drugs varied as follows: psilocybin 115–350 µg/kg orally (low
to high dose); ketamine 6–12 µg kg−1 min−1 intravenously
(medium to high dose); MDMA varied from 1.5–1.7 mg/kg
orally (medium dose; Studerus et al., 2010). Thus, the OAV
scores from Studerus et al. represent the average dose across
43 studies rather than OAV scores of individuals under a
traditional low, medium, or high dose. However, given that
we are unsure of the strength or ‘‘dose’’ of the shamanic
trance each practitioner endured, this comparison is somewhat
preferable. Some shamanic practitioners in our study may have
entered a ‘‘high dose’’ trance during drumming (similar to
a high dose of a psychedelic) whereas others may have had
an experience equivalent to a ‘‘low dose’’. Additionally, while
shamanic practitioners kept their eyes closed during shamanic
drumming, methodology varied across the studies included by

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

CONCLUSION
We found that shamanic practitioners entered an altered
state of consciousness compared to control participants
during drumming, with the magnitude of these changes in
consciousness comparable to or greater than reports during
the psychedelic state. Furthermore, shamanic practitioners
evinced changes in a variety of EEG measures during shamanic
drumming that correlated with measures of their altered states
of consciousness. These findings suggest that shamanic trance
and psychedelic drug-induced altered states of consciousness are
‘‘distinct states with shared traits,’’ meaning that despite various
overlapping phenomenal components, they are characterized by
different changes in brain activity. This suggests the involvement
of endogenous mechanisms for non-pharmacologically-induced
altered states of consciousness that are distinct from those
co-opted by psychedelic drugs.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.

ETHICS STATEMENT
The studies involving human participants were reviewed and
approved by University of Michigan Institutional Review
Board (HUM00089064). The patients/participants provided their
written informed consent to participate in this study.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
EH and HK: formal analysis, writing—original draft,
writing—review
and
editing.
UL:
methodology,
writing—review and editing. TB-B and AC: data
curation, writing—review and editing. AN: data curation.
SB-M: conceptualization, methodology, writing—review and
editing. GM: conceptualization, funding acquisition, resources,
writing—review and editing. RH: conceptualization, supervision,
methodology, resources, writing—review and editing.

13

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

This work was funded by the Center for Consciousness Science,
Department of Anesthesiology, University of Michigan Medical
School.

of psychedelics. Additionally, we would like to thank Kate
Durda and Stephanie Tighe, who offered invaluable insight
as shamanic practitioners when designing our study. This
manuscript has been released as a pre-print at bioRxiv
(Huels et al., 2020).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

We would like to thank Dr. Erich Studerus for his agreement
to and helpful suggestions for comparing our data from
shamanic practitioners to healthy volunteers under the influence

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.
2021.610466/full#supplementary-material.

REFERENCES

states informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 8:20. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Muthukumaraswamy, S., Roseman, L., Kaelen, M.,
Droog, W., Murphy, K., et al. (2016). Neural correlates of the LSD experience
revealed by multimodal neuroimaging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 113,
4853–4858. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1518377113
Delorme, A., and Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis
of single-trial EEG dynamics. J. Neurosci. Methods 134, 9–21. doi: 10.1016/j.
jneumeth.2003.10.009
Don, N. S., McDonough, B. E., Moura, G., Warren, C. A., Kawanishi, K.,
Tomita, H., et al. (1998). Effects of Ayahuasca on the human EEG.
Phytomedicine 5, 87–96. doi: 10.1016/S0944-7113(98)80003-2
Doufesh, H., Faisal, T., Lim, K.-S., and Ibrahim, F. (2012). EEG spectral
analysis on Muslim prayers. Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback 37, 11–18.
doi: 10.1007/s10484-011-9170-1
Doufesh, H., Ibrahim, F., Ismail, N. A., and Wan Ahmad, W. A. (2014). Effect of
Muslim prayer (Salat) on α electroencephalography and its relationship with
autonomic nervous system activity. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 20, 558–562.
doi: 10.1089/acm.2013.0426
Ewerdwalbesloh, J. A., Palva, S., Rösler, F., and Khader, P. H. (2016).
Neural correlates of maintaining generated images in visual working
memory. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 4349–4362. doi: 10.1002/hbm.
23313
Fell, J., Axmacher, N., and Haupt, S. (2010). From α to γ: electrophysiological
correlates of meditation-related states of consciousness. Med. Hypotheses 75,
218–224. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2010.02.025
Fiorica-Howells, E., Hen, R., Gingrich, J., Li, Z., and Gershon, M. D. (2002). 5 HT2A receptors: location and functional analysis in intestines of wild-type
and 5-HT2A knockout mice. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 282,
G877–G893. doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.00435.2001
Flor-Henry, P., Shapiro, Y., and Sombrun, C. (2017). Brain changes during a
shamanic trance: altered modes of consciousness, hemispheric laterality and
systemic psychobiology. Cogent Psychol. 4:1313522. doi: 10.1080/23311908.
2017.1313522
Halberstadt, A. L., and Geyer, M. A. (2011). Multiple receptors contribute to
the behavioral effects of indoleamine hallucinogens. Neuropharmacology 61,
364–381. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.01.017
Harner, M. (1980). The Way of the Shaman. 3rd Edn. San Francisco: Harper and
Row.
Harner, M. (1997). ‘‘15 minute solo drumming with call back’’, in Michael
Harner’s Shamanic Journey Solo and Double Drumming. Mill Valley, CA: The
Foundation for Shamanic Studies, Inc.
Havlík, M. (2017). Missing piece of the puzzle in the science of consciousness:
resting state and endogenous correlates of consciousness. Conscious. Cogn. 49,
70–85. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2017.01.006
Hove, M. J., Stelzer, J., Nierhaus, T., Thiel, S. D., Gundlach, C., Margulies, D. S.,
et al. (2016). Brain network reconfiguration and perceptual decoupling
during an absorptive state of consciousness. Cereb. Cortex 26, 3116–3124.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv137
Huels, E. R., Kim, H., Lee, U., Bel-Bahar, T., Colmenero, A., Nelson, A., et al.
(2020). Neural correlates of the shamanic state of consciousness. bioRxiv
[Preprint]. doi: 10.1101/2020.07.20.212522

FUNDING

Abdullah, A. A., and Omar, Z. (2011). The effect of temporal EEG signals while
listening to quran recitation. Int. J. Adv. Sci. Eng. Inform. Technol. 1, 372–375.
doi: 10.18517/ijaseit.1.4.77
Al-Galal, S. A., and Alshaikhli, I. F. T. (2017). Analyzing brainwaves while
listening to quranic recitation compared with listening to music based
on EEG signals. Int. J. Percept. Cogn. Comput. 3:1. doi: 10.31436/ijpcc.
v3i1.43
Atasoy, S., Roseman, L., Kaelen, M., Kringelbach, M. L., Deco, G., and CarhartHarris, R. L. (2017). Connectome-harmonic decomposition of human brain
activity reveals dynamical repertoire re-organization under LSD. Sci. Rep.
7:17661. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-17546-0
Bak, P., Tang, C., and Wiesenfeld, K. (1988). Self-organized criticality. Phys. Rev.
A Gen. Phys. 38, 364–374. doi: 10.1103/physreva.38.364
Barcelona, J., Fahlman, M., Churakova, Y., Canjels, R., Mallare, J., and van den
Heuvel, M. I. (2020). Frontal α asymmetry during prayerful and resting states:
an EEG study in Catholic sisters. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 155, 9–15. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijpsycho.2020.04.019
Bastos, M. A. V. Jr., Bastos, P. R. H. O., Osório, I. H. S., Muass, K. A. R. C.,
Iandoli, D. Jr., Lucchetti, G., et al. (2016). Frontal electroencephalographic
(EEG) activity and mediumship: a comparative study between spiritist
mediums and controls. Arch. Clin. Psychiatry 43, 20–26. doi: 10.1590/010160830000000076
Beauregard, M., and Paquette, V. (2008). EEG activity in Carmelite nuns during
a mystical experience. Neurosci. Lett. 444, 1–4. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.
08.028
Beethoven, L. (1801/2013). Sonata No.5 in F Major for Violin and Piano, Op. 24,
‘‘Spring’’: I. Allegro. [Song recorded by N. Chastain and F. Rieger] On My First
Beethoven Album. X5 Music Group.
Berkovich-Ohana, A., Glicksohn, J., and Goldstein, A. (2012). Mindfulnessinduced changes in γ band activity—implications for the default mode
network, self-reference and attention. Clin. Neurophysiol. 123, 700–710.
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2011.07.048
Bodmer, I., Dittrich, A., and Lamparter, D. (1994). Aussergewöhnliche
Bewusstseinszustände—Ihre Gemeinsame Struktur und Messung [Altered
States of Consciousness—Their Common Structure and Assessment]. In: Welten
des Bewusstseins. Bd. 3 Experimentelle Psychologie, Neurobiologie und Chemie.
Berlin: Germany.
Braboszcz, C., Cahn, B. R., Levy, J., Fernandez, M., and Delorme, A. (2017).
Increased γ brainwave amplitude compared to control in three different
meditation traditions. PLoS One 12:e0170647. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0170647
Cahn, B. R., Delorme, A., and Polich, J. (2010). Occipital γ activation during
Vipassana meditation. Cogn. Process. 11, 39–56. doi: 10.1007/s10339-009
-0352-1
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T., Stone, J. M., Reed, L. J.,
Colasanti, A., et al. (2012). Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as
determined by fMRI studies with psilocybin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 109,
2138–2143. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1119598109
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P. J., Shanahan, M., Feilding, A.,
Tagliazucchi, E., et al. (2014). The entropic brain: a theory of conscious

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

14

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

Johnson, M. W., Hendricks, P. S., Barrett, F. S., and Griffiths, R. R. (2019). Classic
psychedelics: an integrative review of epidemiology, therapeutics, mystical
experience, and brain network function. Pharmacol. Ther. 197, 83–102.
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.11.010
Kakumanu, R. J., Nair, A. K., Venugopal, R., Sasidharan, A., Ghosh, P. K.,
John, J. P., et al. (2018). Dissociating meditation proficiency and experience
dependent EEG changes during traditional Vipassana meditation practice. Biol.
Psychol. 135, 65–75. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2018.03.004
Kawai, N., Honda, M., Nishina, E., Yagi, R., and Oohashi, T. (2017).
Electroencephalogram characteristics during possession trances in healthy
individuals. Neuroreport 28, 949–955. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000857
Kim, H., and Lee, U. (2019). Criticality as a determinant of integrated information
Φ in human brain networks. Entropy 21:981. doi: 10.3390/e21100981
Kim, M., Kim, S., Mashour, G. A., and Lee, U. (2017). Relationship of topology,
multiscale phase synchronization, and state transitions in human brain
networks. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 11:55. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2017.00055
Kim, M., Mashour, G. A., Moraes, S.-B., Vanini, G., Tarnal, V., Janke, E., et al.
(2016). Functional and topological conditions for explosive synchronization
develop in human brain networks with the onset of anesthetic-induced
unconsciousness. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 10:1. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2016.
00001
Kitzbichler, M. G., Smith, M. L., Christensen, S. R., and Bullmore, E. (2009).
Broadband criticality of human brain network synchronization. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 5:e1000314. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000314
Kometer, M., Pokorny, T., Seifritz, E., and Volleinweider, F. X. (2015).
Psilocybin-induced spiritual experiences and insightfulness are associated with
synchronization of neuronal oscillations. Psychopharmacology 232, 3663–3676.
doi: 10.1007/s00213-015-4026-7
Kometer, M., Schmidt, A., Jäncke, L., and Vollenweider, F. X. (2013).
Activation of serotonin 2A receptors underlies the psilocybin-induced effects
on α oscillations, N170 visual-evoked potentials and visual hallucinations.
J. Neurosci. 33, 10544–10551. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3007-12.2013
Konopacki, M., and Madison, G. (2018). EEG responses to shamanic drumming.
Does the suggestion of trance state moderate the strength of frequency
components? J. Sleep Sleep Disord. Res. 1, 16–25. doi: 10.14302/issn.2574-4518.
jsdr-17-1794
Kraehenmann, R., Pokorny, D., Vollenweider, L., Preller, K. H., Pokorny, T.,
Seifritz, E., et al. (2017). Dreamlike effects of LSD on waking imagery in
humans depend on serotonin 2A receptor activation. Psychopharmacology 234,
2031–2046. doi: 10.1007/s00213-017-4610-0
Krippner, S. (2000). The epistemology and technologies of shamanic states of
consciousness. J. Conscious. Stud. 7, 93–118.
Lee, H., Golkowski, D., Jordan, D., Berger, S., Ilg, R., Lee, J., et al. (2019).
Relationship of critical dynamics, functional connectivity and states of
consciousness in large-scale human brain networks. NeuroImage 188, 228–238.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.12.011
Lee, U., and Mashour, G. A. (2018). The role of network science in the study of
anesthetic state transitions. Anesthesiology 129, 1029–1044. doi: 10.1097/ALN.
0000000000002228
Lee, M., Sanders, R. D., Yeom, S.-K., Won, D.-O., Kim, H.-J., Lee, B.-R.,
et al. (2017). Change in functional networks for transitions between states of
consciousness during midazolam-induced sedation. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. 2017, 958–961. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2017.8036984
Leemburg, S., and Bassetti, C. L. (2018). Lempel-Ziv complexity of the EEG
predicts long-term functional recovery after stroke in rats. bioRxiv [Preprint].
doi: 10.1101/248039
Lempel, A., and Ziv, J. (1976). On the complexity of finite sequences. IEEE Trans.
Inform. Theor. 22, 75–81. doi: 10.1109/tit.1976.1055501
Li, D., and Mashour, G. A. (2019). Cortical dynamics during psychedelic
and anesthetized states induced by ketamine. NeuroImage 196, 32–40.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.03.076
Li, D., Vlisides, P. E., Kelz, M. B., Avidan, M. S., Mashour, G. A., and ReCCognition
Study Group. (2019). Dynamic cortical connectivity during general anesthesia
in healthy volunteers. Anesthesiology 130, 870–884. doi: 10.1097/ALN.
0000000000002656
Luft, C. D. B., Zioga, I., Banissy, M. J., and Bhattacharya, J. (2019). Spontaneous
visual imagery during meditation for creating visual art: an EEG and brain
stimulation case study. Front Psychol 10:210. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00210

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Lutz, A., Greischar, L. L., Rawlings, N. B., Ricard, M., and Davidson, R. J. (2004).
Long-term meditators self-induce high-amplitude γ synchrony during mental
practice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 101, 16369–16373. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0407401101
Martínez Vivot, R., Pallavicini, C., Zamberlan, F., Vigo, D., and Tagliazucchi, E.
(2020). Meditation increases the entropy of brain oscillatory activity.
Neuroscience 431, 40–51. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.01.033
Martinovic, J., and Busch, N. A. (2011). High frequency oscillations as a correlate
of visual perception. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 79, 32–38. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.
2010.07.004
Mediano, P. A. M., Rosas, F. E., Timmermann, C., Roseman, L., Nutt, D. J.,
Feilding, A., et al. (2020). Effects of external stimulation on psychedelic
state neurodynamics. bioRxiv [Preprint]. doi: 10.1101/2020.11.01.
356071
Moretti, P., and Muñoz, M. A. (2013). Griffiths phases and the stretching of
criticality in brain networks. Nat. Commun. 4:2521. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3521
Mozart, W. A. (1788/2009). Sonata for Piano No. 15 in F Major, K. 533: I. Allegro.
[Song recorded by C. Piazzini]. On Mozart: The Complete Piano Sonatas.
Cascade.
Muñoz, M. A. (2018). Colloquium: criticality and dynamical scaling in living
systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 90:031001. doi: 10.1103/revmodphys.90.031001
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Moran, R. J., Brookes, M. J.,
Williams, T. M., Errtizoe, D., et al. (2013). Broadband cortical
desynchronization underlies the human psychedelic state. J. Neurosci. 33,
15171–15183. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2063-13.2013
O’Mahony, S. M., Clarke, G., Borre, Y. E., Dinan, T. G., and Cryan, J. F. (2015).
Serotonin, tryptophan metabolism and the brain-gut-microbiome axis. Behav.
Brain Res. 277, 32–48. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.027
Oohashi, T., Kawai, N., Honda, M., Nakamura, S., Morimoto, M., Nishina, E.,
et al. (2002). Electroencephalographic measurement of possession trance
in the field. Clin. Neurophysiol. 113, 435–445. doi: 10.1016/s1388-2457(02)
00002-0
Pal, D., Li, D., Dean, J. G., Brito, M. A., Liu, T., Fryzel, A. M., et al. (2020).
Level of consciousness is dissociable from electroencephalographic measures of
cortical connectivity, slow oscillations and complexity. J. Neurosci. 40, 605–618.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1910-19.2019
Palhano-Fontes, F., Andrade, K. C., Tofoli, L. F., Santos, A. C., Crippa, J. A. S.,
Hallak, J. E. C., et al. (2015). The psychedelic state induced by ayahuasca
modulates the activity and connectivity of the default mode network. PLoS One
10:e0118143. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118143
Pallavicini, C., Vilas, M. G., Villarreal, M., Zamberlan, F., Muthukumaraswamy, S.,
Nutt, D., et al. (2019). Spectral signatures of serotonergic psychedelics
and glutamatergic dissociatives. NeuroImage 200, 281–291. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2019.06.053
Preller, K. H., Burt, J. B., Ji, J. L., Schleifer, C. H., Adkinson, B. D., Stämpfli, P.,
et al. (2018). Changes in global and thalamic brain connectivity in LSD-induced
altered states of consciousness are attributable to the 5-HT2A receptor. Elife
7:e35082. doi: 10.7554/eLife.35082
Riba, J., Anderer, P., Jané, F., Saletu, B., and Barbanoj, M. J. (2004).
Effects of the South American psychoactive beverage ayahuasca on regional
brain electrical activity in humans: a functional neuroimaging study using
low-resolution electromagnetic tomography. Neuropsychobiology 50, 89–101.
doi: 10.1159/000077946
Riba, J., Anderer, P., Morte, A., Urbano, G., Jané, F., Saletu, B., et al. (2002).
Topographic pharmaco-EEG mapping of the effects of the South American
psychoactive beverage ayahuasca in healthy volunteers. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol.
53, 613–628. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2125.2002.01609.x
Schartner, M. M., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Barrett, A. B., Seth, A. K., and
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D. (2017). Increased spontaneous MEG signal
diversity for psychoactive doses of ketamine, LSD and psilocybin. Sci. Rep.
7:46421. doi: 10.1038/srep46421
Schenberg, E. E., Alexandre, J. F. M., Filev, R., Cravo, A. M., Sato, J. R.,
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., et al. (2015). Acute biphasic effects of ayahuasca.
PLoS One 10:e0137202. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137202
Stam, C. J., Nolte, G., and Daffertshofer, A. (2007). Phase lag index:
assessment of functional connectivity from multi channel EEG and MEG with
diminished bias from common sources. Hum. Brain Mapp. 28, 1178–1193.
doi: 10.1002/hbm.20346

15

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

Huels et al.

Neural Correlates of Shamanic Consciousness

Studerus, E., Gamma, A., and Vollenweider, F. X. (2010). Psychometric evaluation
of the altered states of consciousness rating scale (OAV). PLoS One 5:e12412.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012412
Timmermann, C., Roseman, L., Schartner, M., Milliere, R., Williams, L. T. J.,
Erritzoe, D., et al. (2019). Neural correlates of the DMT experience assessed
with multivariate EEG. Sci. Rep. 9:16324. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-51974-4
Tributsch, H. (2018). Shamanic trance journey with animal spirits: ancient
‘‘scientific’’ strategy dealing with inverted otherworld. Adv. Anthropol. 8,
91–126. doi: 10.4236/aa.2018.83006
Vaghefi, M., Nasrabadi, A. M., Golpayegani, S. M. R. H., Mohammadi, M.-R., and
Gharibzadeh, S. (2015). Spirituality and brain waves. J. Med. Eng. Technol. 39,
153–158. doi: 10.3109/03091902.2014.1001528
Vaghefi, M., Nasrabadi, A. M., Hashemi Golpayegani, S. M. R.,
Mohammadi, M. R., and Gharibzadeh, S. (2019). Nonlinear analysis of
electroencephalogram signals while listening to the holy quran. J. Med. Signals
Sens. 9, 100–110. doi: 10.4103/jmss.JMSS_37_18
Valle, M., Maqueda, A. E., Rabella, M., Rodríguez-Pujadas, A., Antonijoan, R. M.,
Romero, S., et al. (2016). Inhibition of α oscillations through serotonin-2A
receptor activation underlies the visual effects of ayahuasca in humans.
Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 26, 1161–1175. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.
2016.03.012
Vinck, M., Oostenveld, R., van Wingerden, M., Battaglia, F., and Pennartz, C. M. A.
(2011). An improved index of phase-synchronization for electrophysiological

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

data in the presence of volume-conduction, noise and sample-size bias.
NeuroImage 55, 1548–1565. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.01.055
Winkelman, M. J. (2013). Shamanism and psychedelics: a biogenetic structuralist
paradigm of ecopsychology. Eur. J. Ecopsychol. 4, 90–115.
Yoon, S., Sorbaro Sindaci, M., Goltsev, A. V., and Mendes, J. F. F. (2015). Critical
behavior of the relaxation rate, the susceptibility and a pair correlation function
in the Kuramoto model on scale-free networks. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin. Soft
Matter Phys. 91:032814. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.91.032814
Zhang, X. S., Roy, R. J., and Jensen, E. W. (2001). EEG complexity as a measure
of depth of anesthesia for patients. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 48, 1424–1433.
doi: 10.1109/10.966601
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Huels, Kim, Lee, Bel-Bahar, Colmenero, Nelson, Blain-Moraes,
Mashour and Harris. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

16

March 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 610466

