50 Years of Schumann Resonance
Kristian Schlegel1 and Martin Füllekrug2
1
2

Max-Planck-Institut für Sonnensystemforschung, Katlenburg-Lindau, Germany
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Bath, UK

(originally published in Physik in unserer Zeit, 33(6), 256-26, 2002. Translation: Catarina Geoghan, 2007)

In 1952 Winfried Otto Schumann, at that time Director of the Electrophysical Institute at
the Technical University of Munich, published his first paper about electromagnetic
waves in the waveguide which is formed by the earth's surface and the ionosphere.
Since this time the study of these, later referred to as Schumann resonance waves,
has become an interesting subject for research. With modern measurement techniques
the recording of these resonances opens up various application possibilities, ranging
from global lightning triangulation, detection of space weather effects to tracking down
global climate variations.

1. Schumann Resonance Principles
Each finite waveguide has its characteristic natural frequency (resonant
frequency). Schumann (see box 1) recognised for the first time, that the space
bounded by the highly conducting earth and the likewise highly conducting
ionosphere represents such a waveguide (fig. 1).

Fig.1 Original sketch by Schumann [1] for the illustration of the waveguide which is formed by
the highly conducting earth and the highly conducting ionosphere (plasma), r signifies the earth
radius, R-r ≈ 80 km.

One can derive its resonant frequency approximately from the assumption that
the resonance wavelength must be an integer part of the circumference of the
earth. With this assumption one arrives at

fn =

λn
c

=

c
n ≈ 7.5n [ Hz]
2πre

(1)

n=1 represents thereby the fundamental frequency, all larger n the higher
harmonic waves.

50 Years of Schumann Resonance

1

Schumann’s contribution consisted of the fact that he derived the eigen
frequencies of this waveguide mathematically in a very general form [1]. Taking
spherical geometry into account one obtains the resonant frequencies

fn =

V (σ )
n ( n + 1) ≈ 6.0 n ( n + 1) [ Hz ]
2πre
(2)

which also includes the damping of the waves because of the finite conductivity
of the “upper” boundary of the waveguide, namely the ionospheric D-layer. Its
propagation speed V therefore amounts to - depending on the conductivity σ about 80% of the speed of light (the relationship with the conductivity is
described in somewhat more detail in box 2). While the conductivity of the
ionospheric lower boundary is very variable at a height of 70-90 km with values
between 10-5 to 10-3 S/m (see below), the average conductivity of the ground
and the sea at approximately 10-3 S/m is practically constant and usually
greater than the latter. It therefore does not contribute substantially to the
damping of the waves.
Schumann, who had for some years also dealt with so-called sferics, the
electromagnetic emissions of lightning, recognised also that it is these impulselike emissions which excite oscillations in the earth-ionosphere waveguide. Fig. 2
shows the time signal of these oscillations together with their spectrum for all
modes up to n=7.

Fig. 2 Time signal (left) and spectrum (right) of the first 7 Schumann resonances measured at
Silberborn in Solling Mountains (Germany). Although the nearest electric railway is about 30 km
away, the 16 2/3 Hz and the mains frequency signals are much stronger than the Schumann
resonance. The increase in the spectrum at frequencies <5 Hz is caused by so-called magnetic
micropulsations which originate in the earth’s magnetosphere.

2

Kristian Schlegel and Martin Füllekrug : 2007

The spectrum for each mode can be characterised by three values: its centre
frequency, its amplitude and its width (fig. 3), the latter is a measure of the
damping of the mode in question.

Fig. 3 The spectrum for each mode (here for n=1) can be identified by the three parameters
Centre Frequency f0, Amplitude a and Width b.

The first measurements were published by Schumann and König in 1954 [3].
Between 1960 and 1970 further measurement results were published as well as
extended theoretical work on the topic. Schumann resonance experienced a
renaissance at the beginning of the 1990's, after measurement methods had
improved and new applications appeared (see overview in [4]).

2. Measurement Methods
Since Schumann resonances involve electromagnetic waves, the electrical and/
or the magnetic components can in principle be recorded. With the electrical
component the potential between earth and a dish or ball mounted at a height of
a few meters is measured as a function of time. Since the atmosphere exhibits
very high impedance of the order of magnitude of 1014 Ω, the measuring
amplifiers must be of extremely high impedance, but also at the same time fulfil
the necessary frequency bandwidth of some 10 Hz. For the measurement of
magnetic components induction coils are used, which are set up horizontally in
two directions perpendicular to each other (N-S, E-W), in order to also include
the polarisation of the waves (see fig. 2). Since the signal is of the order of
magnitude of 0.001-1 pT (10-12 Tesla), coils with a core of high permeability as
well as several 10000 turns are necessary. The measurement of the electrical
component proved very error-prone because of charging of the ball/dish through

50 Years of Schumann Resonance

3

the photoelectric effect or surface contamination, magnetic field measurement is
therefore preferred nowadays. Measurement in industrialised areas is however
always difficult, because of the interference with the 50 Hz mains frequency and
the 16 2/3 Hz of the German railway, even at a greater distance of such sources
(fig. 2). Narrow-band filters can thereby not be used because of the inevitable
distortion of the wanted signal. Recording electronics must therefore cover a
great dynamic range, in order to be able to eliminate the interference
computationally. Clean measurements can be obtained, for instance, from
stations in the Antarctic.
Fig. 4 shows a coil as well as the appropriate electronics for measurements in
the field.

Fig. 4 Vertically placed coil for the measurement of the vertical component of the Schumann
resonance (above) and electronics box for the detection and storage of the time signal (below).
Because Schumann resonance must be measured far away from technical disturbances, the
entire electronics is operated in the open with batteries.

4

Kristian Schlegel and Martin Füllekrug : 2007

3. Schumann resonance Applications and Effects

a. Lightning Detection
A field of application of Schumann resonance, which was already recognised
very early, is global lightning triangulation. Since each lightning induces
oscillations in the earth-ionosphere waveguide, three stations are in principle
sufficient, which should be at as large a distance as possible from each other.
Thereby, the time signal of these oscillations are recorded with corresponding
high time resolution (approx. 1/100s) (fig. 5).

[ B ] = pT

40
20

16.04.98 14:59:30

SIL

0
−20
−40
30.4

[ B ] = pT

40
20

30.6

30.8

31

31.2
31.4
[t]=s

31.6

31.8

32

32.2

30.6

30.8

31

31.2
31.4
[t]=s

31.6

31.8

32

32.2

30.6

30.8

31

31.2
31.4
[t]=s

31.6

31.8

32

32.2

HOL

0
−20
−40
30.4

[ B ] = pT

40
20

LAM

0
−20
−40
30.4

Fig. 5 Concurrent recording of the first Schumann resonance in Hollister/California (HOL),
Silberborn/Germany (SIL) and Wellington/New Zealand (WEL). The triangulation showed that
the flash, which released this signal, ignited over South America.

50 Years of Schumann Resonance

5

Temporal synchronisation of the stations is ensured with the aid of GPS
satellites. Through cross-correlation of these three time series, lightning can
then be located with an accuracy of several 100 km with the aid of spherical
geometry. Fig.6, for instance, shows the result of such measurements for one
month, which can be used for the study of global thunderstorm activity [5]. A
global network for monitoring of lightning is being developed as a warning
system for air traffic.

no.

1000
500
90
60
30
0
−30
−60
−90
−180 −135

500 1000
no.
Fig. 6 The global distribution of flash frequency in April 1998 recorded with the help of
Schumann resonance triangulation. There are generally three centres with increased flash
frequency: over America, Africa and Southeast Asia, while only few thunderstorms appear over
the oceans.
−90

−45

0

45

90

135

180

In the last few years these methods have also been used together with optical
measurements for the observation of sprites. Sprites (see fig. 7 right) are
transient, red-bluish light phenomena, which reach up from the top surface of
the cloud to the ionosphere. These optical emissions were first discovered in
1989 [6] and are induced by unusually strong lightning. The electromagnetic
impulse of such lightning leads, in addition, to circular light phenomena in the
ionosphere, which are referred to as elves. Besides sprites, blue jets have also
been observed. These are relatively narrow, blue rays of light, which reach up
from the thundercloud to 40-50 km. Despite intensive research it has not so far
been unequivocally clarified whether these phenomena really are a question of
natural gas discharges in the atmosphere. However, there has been a report in
Nature [7] about a bright flash over an oceanic thunderstorm up to the
ionosphere near Puerto Rico. The luminosity of this phenomenon is very
suggestive of an electrical short-circuit between the troposphere and the
ionosphere.

6

Kristian Schlegel and Martin Füllekrug : 2007

In the framework of the space shuttle mission STS-107, the first Israeli
astronaut in space will use a video camera for the determination of the global
frequency of this recently discovered lightning in the mesosphere in the summer
of 2002 (fig. 7).

Fig. 7 From the space shuttle an Israeli astronaut will search for sprites and natural gas
discharges in the mesosphere with a video camera. On the right below the original photo of a
sprite is inserted (the picture was created with STK Software. With approval of M. Moalem, IAF).

50 Years of Schumann Resonance

7

b. Global D-layer Monitoring and Space Weather
As previously mentioned, the conductivity of the lower boundary of the
ionosphere is very variable. It is ultimately determined by the electron density
and the collision frequency between neutral particles and electrons within the
ionospheric D-layer. The electron density changes regularly with the position of
the sun, i.e. with the time of day and season, the collision frequency is
proportional to the pressure in this height region, which likewise is subject to
seasonal variation. In addition, there are irregular changes. During geomagnetic
storms, electrons from the magnetosphere with energies of some keV are
precipitating into the ionosphere and cause additional ionisation, whereby
electron density can rise by more than an order of magnitude above normal
values. Even stronger changes are caused by solar flares, as a result of which
protons are emitted with energies of over 100 MeV. These particles can
penetrate deeply into the atmosphere and cause additional ionisation down to a
height of 50 km. As a result the conductivity is not only significantly increased,
but the upper boundary of the waveguide is also shifted far downward (fig. 8).

Fig. 8 Conductivity of the ionospheric D-layer under normal conditions and after a solar flare.
The raised conductivity changes not only the electric properties of the earth-ionosphere
waveguide and thereby the Schumann resonance parameters, the upper boundary of the
waveguide is also shifted downwards substantially by such events [9].

8

Kristian Schlegel and Martin Füllekrug : 2007

Such space weather events affect all three parameters of the Schumann
resonance spectra in clearly measurable ways (fig. 9).

Fig. 9 Changes in Schumann resonance parameters f0, b, a (cf. fig. 3) after two solar flares
from 20.10.1989 (left) and from 22.3.1991 (right). Directly above the flux of high-energy protons
is shown, which cause the additional ionisation below 80 km and thereby change the
conductivity as shown in fig. 8 [9].

These parameters can therefore be used in order to monitor the temporal
variation in the D-layer conductivity, which Schumann already referred to in his
second publication on this topic [2]. Naturally, in this way one arrives at a global
average value, which is to be interpreted as a mean between the dayside and
the nightside of the earth. A recording of this mean conductivity is nevertheless
meaningful since, apart from regular seasonal variation, the above mentioned
irregular deviations can also be recorded in a simple manner. Such monitoring
of the D-layer is already possible with a single station in an interference-free
environment [8] and a global tomography of the ionosphere becomes possible
with a network of stations.

50 Years of Schumann Resonance

9

c. Climate Change
Schumann resonance is possibly suitable as a sensitive thermometer for global
temperature changes. Global thunderstorm activity is essentially determined by
meteorological factors, among other things by the temperature of the equatorial
troposphere. On the other hand, Schumann resonance allows for the quantitative measurement of global thunderstorm activity, as pointed out above. In a
sensational and exciting paper the American meteorologist E. Williams has
published a comparison between the relative tropical temperatures during an ElNino cycle and the amplitude of the first Schumann resonance, whereby a
significant positive correlation was found [10]. Although his data covers only a
period of 5 1/2 years (fig. 10), these results are very promising for the understanding of long-term climate variations. A possible non-linear reinforcement of
the greenhouse effect is thereby of special interest. It is well-known that global
thunderstorm activity in the tropics transports large quantities of water vapour
into the tropopause. Water vapour is, however, also the most important
greenhouse gas. Therefore, the technically difficult measurement of the water
vapour content in the tropopause can be realised with the help of Schumann
resonance [11] and contribute to current questions in climate research.

Fig. 10 The amplitude of the first Schumann resonance and relative change in the tropical
surface temperature (thick line). From [10].

10

Kristian Schlegel and Martin Füllekrug : 2007

d. Biological Effects
Schumann himself was interested in the biological effects of sferics in general,
and his student and later colleague Herbert König has continued this work. In a
summary [12] the latter quotes many surprising results of such effects. They
span from an influence on yeast cells and bacteria as well as plants and
animals to humans. Human weather sensitivity is, for example, strengthened
with increased amplitudes of natural oscillations at 10 Hz. With artificial
application of such waves human circadian periodicity is significantly
accelerated, test subjects show extended response time, or they cause
headache. In many of these experiments effects showed a strong dependence
on frequency. The so-called alpha waves during brain activity lie in the same
frequency range as the first two modes of the Schumann resonance. Medics
speculate that this is possibly no coincidence, but human adaptation to the
electromagnetic environment in the course of evolution. In this border area
between physics, biology and medicine there are perhaps still interesting results
forthcoming.

50 Years of Schumann Resonance

11

Literature
[1]

Schumann, W.O., Über die strahlungslosen Eigenschwingungen einer leitenden
Kugel, die von einer Luftschicht und einer Ionosphärenhülle umgeben ist, Z.
Naturforsch. 7a, 149, (1952)

[2]

Schumann, W.O., Über die Dämpfung der elektromagnetischen Eigenschwingungen des Systems Erde-Luft-Ionosphäre, Z. Naturforsch. 7a, 250,
(1952)

[3]

Schumann, W.O. und H. König, Über die Beobachtung von Atmospherics bei
geringsten Frequenzen, Naturwissensch., 41, 283, (1954)

[4]

Sentman, D.D., Schumann Resonances, in: Handbook of Atmospheric
Electrodynamics, Vol. 1, H. Volland, Editor, CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA, 1995,
p. 267.

[5]

Füllekrug, M. und S. Constable, Global triangulation of intense lightning
discharges, Geophys. Res. Lett. 27, 333 (2000)

[6]

Franz, R.C., R.J. Nemzek und J.R. Winckler, Television image of a large upward
electrical discharge above a thunderstorm system, Science, 249, 48, (1990)

[7]

Pasko, V.P., M.A. Stanley, J.D. Mathews, U.S. Inan und T.G. Wood, Electrical
discharge from a thundercloud top to the lower ionosphere, Nature, 416, 152,
(2002)

[8]

Füllekrug, M., Fraser-Smith, A.C. und K. Schlegel, Global ionospheric D-layer
height monitoring, European Physics Letters, 59(4),626, (2002)

[9]

Schlegel, K. und M. Füllekrug, Schumann resonance parameter changes during
high-energy particle precipitation, J. Geophys. Res. 104, 10111, (1999)

[10] Williams, E.R., The Schumann resonance: A global tropical thermometer,
Science 256, 1184, (1992)
[11] Price, C., Evidence for a link between global lightning activity and upper
tropospheric water vapour, Nature, 406, 290, (2000)
[12] König, H.L., Unsichtbare Umwelt, Eigenverlag Herbert L. König, München, 1977

12

Kristian Schlegel and Martin Füllekrug : 2007

Box 1

W.O. Schumann
Born on 20th of May 1888 in Tübingen, Winfried Otto Schumann spent his
childhood and youth in Kassel, Bernsdorf near Vienna and Karolinental near
Prague. After studying electrical engineering at the Technical College in
Karlsruhe, and his doctorate (1912) on a subject of high-current technology, he
worked as a manager at the High Voltage Laboratory at the Bown, Boveri and
Cie Company up to the outbreak of the First World War. In 1920 Schumann
qualified as a professor (Habilitation) at the Technical University in Stuttgart
where he was employed as a research assistant. Immediately afterwards he
was offered a position as a university professor of physics at the University of
Jena. In 1924 he took up an offer as full professor and director of the newly
established Electrophysical Laboratory at the Technical University of Munich.
This was later upgraded to the Electrophysical Institute, and he remained there
until his retirement in 1961. He practised his teaching, however, up to his 75th
year. Schumann died at the age of 86 years on 22nd of September in 1974.
While during his industrial activity he had dealt primarily with the disruptive field
strength of gases, liquids and solid states, during his time in Munich his interest
extended to high-frequency technology and plasma physics. In a series of very
noteworthy publications Schumann worked on the behaviour of the ionosphere
and plasma experiments in the laboratory under similar conditions.
In a third productive period after 1950, Schumann dealt with questions of wave
propagation and with electromagnetic waves which are induced by lightning.
During this time the publications focussed on the resonances named after him.
Schumann was respected both by colleagues as well as by students as an
excellent academic teacher. His listeners were inspired by the master of the art
of lecturing, the lectures distinguished themselves by exemplary descriptiveness and clarity, but at the same time were performed with wit and humour.

50 Years of Schumann Resonance

13

W.O. Schumann during his popular lecture.

14

Kristian Schlegel and Martin Füllekrug : 2007

Box 2

The propagation velocity of the waves in the cavity between Earth and the
ionosphere used in eq. (2) is V=c/n, where the complex index of refraction can
be written in a first approximation as

n = 1+ i

c∆ i
ωh1

(A1)

Here ∆i is the inverse index of refraction of the ionosphere, for which in the
simplest description a lower boundary at a fixed height h1 (about 70-80 km) is
assumed; c is the velocity of light. The relationship between this inverse index
of refraction and the conductivity of the ionosphere σ0 is given as

⎛
σ ⎞
∆ i = ⎜⎜1 + i 0 ⎟⎟
ε 0ω ⎠
⎝

−1 / 2

(A2)

The surface of the Earth is assumed in this case as a perfect conductor.
In a more realistic description instead of the constant conductivity σ0 a
conductivity profile is used which is characterised either by one or by two scale
heights (S1, S2). In the 2-scale-height model, instead of (A1) the index of
refraction becomes

n=

h2 (ω ) − i
h1 (ω ) − i

π

π

2
2

S2
,

(A3)

S1

where we assume that the conductivity profile is described at height h1 by the
scale height S1, and at height h2 by the scale height S2. The so-called
conductivity boundary h1 is approximately located at an altitude of 50 km, the
reflection boundary h2 at 75 to 85 km depending on the actual electron density
profile of the ionosphere (c.f. fig. 8). Since the complex index of refraction
(A1,A3) depends on the wave frequency ω, the centre frequency and the width
of the spectrum (damping) are in turn related to the conductivity. This explains
the results shown in fig. 9. A detailed derivation of the above expressions is
documented in [4].

50 Years of Schumann Resonance

15

