Neurophysiological Background for the Safe & Sound Protocol
The Safe & Sound Protocol (SSP) is an innovative intervention designed to improve an individual’s social
communication behaviors by reducing hearing sensitivities (i.e., hyperacusis) and improving the ability to
process human speech. The intervention is based on the Polyvagal Theory (Porges, 1995, 1997, 1998, 2001,
2003, 2007) and is designed to enhance the processing of human speech by dampening the masking and
interference of background sounds. The intervention is theoretically driven by scientific evidence relating the
regulation of the middle ear muscles to: 1) dampen background sounds and improve perception of human
speech; 2) neuroanatomical and neurophysiological circuits controlling facial expressions, vocal intonations and
gestures; and 3) neural circuits regulating behavioral state. [See Porges and Lewis (2010) for scientific basis of
intervention and see Porges et al. (2013, 2014) for peer‐reviewed publications of application of the intervention
to children with autism spectrum disorders.]
The middle ear muscles actively dampen low frequency background sounds and facilitate the ability to hear and
to understand human speech (see Borg & Counter, 1989; Zwislock, 2002). When the middle ear muscles do not
contract appropriately, individuals tend to have sound sensitivities and difficulties in understanding speech in
noisy environments. This apparent problem has an adaptive advantage and functionally amplifies the ability to
the hear very low frequency sounds (from 20 ‐ 100 Hz, whereas human speech is in the 500 ‐ 4,000 Hz range),
which through the evolutionary history of mammals has been associated with danger and predators. Thus, if
middle ear muscles do not appropriately contract, low frequency sounds (below the level of human speech) will
be perceived as loud, even when others, whose middle ear muscles contract, can barely hear them. Illness,
fever, and aging also reduce the function of the middle ear muscles and result in associated difficulties of
understanding human voice in noisy environments. In addition, psychological states of fear also adaptively shift
the function of middle ear muscles to promote states of hypervigilance in anticipation of a predator, while
compromising the ability to process the meaning of human speech.
Figure 1 illustrates how the stapedius (the primary middle ear muscle) attenuates low frequency sounds to
facilitate the processing of
human speech. The pattern
on the left side of the figure
illustrates an acoustic signal
representing the composite of
speech (high frequency and
low amplitude) superimposed
on background noise (low
frequency and high
amplitude). The complex
acoustic information impinges
on the eardrum and is initially
filtered by middle ear
structures prior to being
transmitted through the inner
ear on its journey to the brain, where it is perceived.
The top part of the figure illustrates how speech is lost in background sounds when the stapedius is inactive. An
© 2016 Stephen Porges PhD v4.2017

1

inactive stapedius releases the tension on the eardrum (similar to loosening the tension on a kettledrum) and
the low frequency sounds of the environment, instead of being attenuated by the middle ear structures, are
transmitted to the auditory cortex via the auditory nerve from the inner ear. In this case, the information that
reaches the cortex is dominated by low frequency sounds and human speech is masked. In this example, the
loud low frequency sound is processed and detected, but the features of the softer higher frequency sounds of
human speech are lost in the background sounds. In the bottom part of the figure, the stapedius actively
functions to dampen the impact of low frequency sounds. As the middle ear muscles are activated, the rigidity of
the ossicle chain in the middle ear increases and the eardrum becomes tighter. Metaphorically, this is similar to
striking a kettledrum. When the head of the drum is tightly pulled, the sounds have a higher pitch and when the
tension of the head of the drum is lessened the sounds have a lower pitch. Thus, similar to the mechanics of a
kettledrum, the middle ear muscles have a capacity to ‘dampen’ low frequency sounds (i.e., background noises)
to enhance the processing of speech. The SSP was developed to rehabilitate the function of the middle ear
muscles by providing a sequence of acoustic stimuli designed to enhance the neural regulation of the middle ear
muscles.
The acoustic environment is frequently dominated by acoustic energy in frequencies lower than human speech.
Figure 2 illustrates the frequency representation on the left of a word (the number “eight”) and background
sounds on the right. Note
the overlap of the low
frequencies and the
unique information in the
frequency band above
800 Hz. This

Figure SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: Frequenc

figure emphasizes the
importance of detecting
higher frequency content
in speech. Understanding
speech is dependent on
processing not only the
lower frequencies of vowels, but also the higher frequencies of consonants. Thus, when middle ear muscles are
NOT functioning appropriately the subjective experience is hearing speech without being able to decipher the
words, especially when consonants (i.e., higher frequency sounds) are at the end of the word.
Normal ears in mammals evolved to optimize the processing of vocalizations. Based on the transfer function of
middle ear structures, mammals have a frequency band of perceptual advantage (see Porges & Lewis, 2010). In
humans, this coincides with the frequencies that have been used to define the index of articulation (see Kryter,
1962) or the speech intelligibility index (see American National Standards Institute, ANSI, 1997). In Figure 3,
these frequencies are emphasized by the red line. Figure 3 illustrates the A‐weighted decibel scale, which
attempts to describe relative loudness to a normal human ear. The Y‐axis represents the difference between the
acoustic energy (i.e., sound pressure level) and the perceived loudness. Note that the frequency band described
by the red line is close to a value of ‘0’ on the Y‐axis. This means that normal ears do not attenuate sounds
within this frequency band. However, the acoustic energy of the sounds (i.e., sound pressure level) at low
frequencies are greatly attenuated. In Figure 3 low ‘bass’ frequencies are attenuated up to 45 dB relative to the
© 2016 Stephen Porges PhD v4.2017

2

sound level of voice. This attenuation is due, in part, to the physics of the ear and the function of the middle ear
muscles. Thus, individuals with poor middle ear muscle tone will experience low frequency sounds as louder
(and often painful) than individuals with optimal functioning middle ear muscles.
Figure 4 provides an illustration of how typical adults judge the relative loudness of tone at specific frequencies.
The data were generated in Dr. Porges’ laboratory and illustrate that a 30 Hz tone at 100 dB is judged to be the
equivalent loudness to a 1000 Hz tone at 60 db. In both Figure 3 and 4, note that relative ‘flatness’ in the
frequency band between about 500 Hz and 4,000 Hz. This is the band in which virtually all the information
related to social communication, including speech, occurs.

Our personal
experiences confirm
that there are
individual and
maturational
differences in the
neural regulation of
the middle ear
muscles. These
differences
contribute to
difficulties in
understanding
human speech in
noisy environments.
We can understand
these differences in middle ear function by observing the “natural” experiment that occurs in many families with
typically developing children. Typically developing adolescents will adjust the bass of a car radio to deal with the
attenuation of low frequency sounds when music has a vocal track (i.e., voice). Many of us have experienced the
booming of the car bass and the difficulties we have hearing vocal tracks or understanding when someone in the
car is talking to us. With typically developing adolescents, the middle ear muscles are so responsive to human
voice that when the vocal track is played, their middle ear muscles contract and greatly reduce the amplitude of
the lower frequencies in the music (consistent with the Figures above). To compensate for this attenuation, the
child will normally turn the bass control up to amplify the low frequencies in the music. For many of us, when we
are monitoring our children while driving, we are in physiological states that support our hypervigilance (this
physiological state downregulates the neural tone to the middle ear muscles to be prepared for danger and not
conversation). Once the bass is turned up, the low frequencies trigger our hypervigilance as our body associates
the low frequencies with a potential threat. The loud low frequency sounds prepare us to detect predator
(signaled by low frequency sounds) and we can no longer hear the vocal track or individuals talking. Thus, when
we are bothered by the loud low frequency sounds and the child is not, we are experiencing a moderate
auditory hypersensitivity to low frequencies that interferes with our ability to perceive and understand human
voice. There are individuals in whom
© 2016 Stephen Porges PhD v4.2017
3

this system is greatly compromised, so that vacuum cleaners, ventilation systems, escalators, traffic, airplanes
and even elevators can be perceived as being loud and painful.
The ability to recruit the middle ear muscles to contract and dampen background sounds is compromised with
aging. Also, the neural tone to these muscles is greatly decreased in fearful situations, during high fever, or even
during states of physiological or
psychological stress. This decrease
in muscle tone enhances the
detection of low frequency sounds,
sounds often associated with
predators. However, this ‘adaptive’
stress response makes it difficult to
perceive and understand human
speech. Thus, under stressful
conditions we have difficulty in
listening to the specific words of
others, but have no difficulty in
focusing on the low frequency
sounds that may accompany an
intruder or a potential threat. Most
people experience this
phenomenon in “unsafe”
environments. For example, during walks into unfamiliar and potentially dangerous neighborhoods, our listening
shifts from our companion’s voice to the low frequency sounds of footsteps or traffic. Similarly, when left alone
in a house, individuals often report sounds such as creaking of floor boards or shutters that are seldom heard in
the presence of friends. In addition, aging, illness, medication, trauma, and experience may also compromise the
function of middle ear muscles.
The Polyvagal Theory focuses on how function and structure changed in the vertebrate autonomic nervous
system during evolution. The theory is named for the vagus, a major cranial nerve that regulates bodily state. As
a function of evolution, humans and other mammals have a “new” vagal pathway that links the regulation of
bodily state to the control of the muscles of the face and head including the middle ear muscles. These
pathways regulating body state, facial gesture, listening (i.e., middle ear muscles), and vocal communication
function collectively as a Social Engagement System. Because the Social Engagement System is an integrated
system, interventions influencing one component of this system (e.g., middle ear muscles) may impact on the
other components.
The middle ear muscles are the smallest muscles in the body. These muscles control the rigidity in relation to
each other’s mobility of small bones in the middle ear. The rigidity of these structures determines the intensity
of low frequency information reaching the inner ear and the brain. Difficulties in regulating the middle ear
muscles increase the loudness (i.e., energy) of low frequency sounds that reach the inner ear and overwhelm
the relatively soft sounds that characterize the human voice. This potentially results in auditory
hypersensitivities (especially to low frequency sounds) and difficulties in understanding human voice in noisy
environments (see Borg & Counter, 1989).
© 2016 Stephen Porges PhD v4.2017

4

Physical exercise and other rehabilitative strategies provide a useful metaphor to explain how the SSP works.
With the appropriate monitoring by a coach, training exercises may be matched to fitness level. If the training
exercises are too intense, fatigue and injury may occur. If the exercise demands are appropriate, neural
regulation of the muscles will improve and the muscles will become stronger and more flexible. Since the middle
ear muscles are primarily fast twitch and fatigue easily, care must be taken in designing the SSP. A great deal of
research has gone into the SSP design to insure that the daily sessions do not result in inappropriate fatigue.
Other everyday experiences provide additional insights relating the exercise metaphor to listening. Musicians,
vocalists, and actors develop skills to monitor the sounds from their instruments or voices. They learn “listening”
techniques to focus on their own voices or musical instruments, even in a background of other sounds. They
learn to identify specific auditory signals by concentrating on other voices and instruments. Listening provides
an important venue to extract critical information regarding the world. Our success in adapting to the
continuously changing and challenging acoustic environment mandates an ability to rapidly extract accurate
information, even in environments characterized by loud background sounds.
In Figure 5 (next page) the acoustic environment is mapped on two dimensions, pitch (frequency) and loudness
(sound pressure level). The Figure is included to emphasize the overlap in acoustic features of speech and music.
Note that music has frequencies that extend beyond speech and may be louder than speech. Moreover, not all
speech provides signals of safety. Speech, as well as music, can signal danger and life threat. Our nervous system
universally detects high frequency shrill cries as alerts for danger and this is mimicked in music. In addition, our
nervous system detects monotonic
low frequencies as sounds of threat.
This may at times be conveyed by
male voices that can terrorize a
young child. In both examples,
loudness ramps up the bodily
response.
A segment of the frequencies of
human speech defined as the band
of perceptual advantage (see
Porges & Lewis, 2010) is capable of
triggering bodily states of safety
when modulated to mimic the
prosodic features of a mother’s
calming voice. These features
characterize a mother singing a
lullaby. The circle in the figure
illustrates the approximate
frequencies and loudness of the stimuli used in the SSP.
The information we extract from our environments is broader than the explicit physical features. Successful
people also accurately evaluate the emotions and intentions of others. Thus, a child’s developmental trajectory
is, in part, dependent upon the ability to detect relevant social cues from human speech, gestures, and facial
expressions. These skills are, in part, dependent on our ability to dampen irrelevant and often noisy background
© 2016 Stephen Porges PhD v4.2017

5

sounds and to accurately detect feelings and intentions of others and to communicate feelings and intentions to
others with socially appropriate cues and signals (e.g., facial expressions, head tilt, eye movements, vocalizations
and body posture.)
The Polyvagal Theory provides the neurophysiological insight to train the neural regulation of the middle ear
muscles. Based on the theory, this training should optimize not only verbal communication, but should also
improve the regulation of affect through facial expressions, intonation of voice (i.e, prosody), gesture, and
autonomic state. The SSP, informed by the Polyvagal Theory, was developed to use a complex program of
acoustic stimulation to exercise and systematically challenge the neural regulation of the middle ear muscles.

© 2016 Stephen Porges PhD v4.2017

6

